<IV?!?lffSi!!lfV!!> iiuk WXf^fKK
^ifc-a- - **#
« * * ^ * * J^
^IS!
^.iff^ifetMMigaMf^tfeinMiMiJf^ngingiii
Digitized by the Internet Arciiive in 2009
littp://www.arcliive.org/details/grimmscompletefaOOgrim


GRIMM'S Complete Fairy Tales

GRIMM'S Complete Fairy Tales
International Collectors Library
Garden City, New York
Printed in the United States of America
Contents
1. The Frog Prince i
2. The Gallant Tailor 4
3. The Giant and the Tailor 11
4. The Little Farmer 13
5. The Golden Key 17
6. Sharing Joy and Sorrow 18
7. The Nail 19
8. Tom Thumb 19
9. Tom Thumb's Travels 24 10. The Young Giant 28
11. Sweet Porridge 34
12. The Elves 35
13. Fair Katrinelje and Pif-Paf-Poltrie 38
14. The Old Beggar- Woman 39
15. The Jew Among Thorns 39
16. King Thrushbeard 43
17. Clever Gretel 47
18. Fitcher's Bird 49 19. The Robber Bridegroom 5^
20. Old Hildebrand 55
21. The Singing Bone 58 22. Maid Maleen 60
23. The Goose-Girl 65
24. The Skilful Huntsman 7^
25. The Princess in Disguise 75 26. Cinderella 80
27. Simeli Mountain 86 28. The Glass Coffin 88
29. Rapunzel 93
30. The Sleeping Beauty 96
31. Old Rinkrank 99
32. Hansel and Gretel 101
33. The Straw, the Coal, and the Bean 107
34. The Death of the Hen 108
35. The Rabbit's Bride 110
vi Contents
36. The Hare and the Hedgehog 111
37. The Dog and the Sparrow 114
38. Old Sultan 116
39. Mr. Korbes 118
40. The Vagabonds 119
41. The Owl 121
42. The Bremen Town Musicians 123
43. The Wonderful Musician 126
44. The Mouse, the Bird, and the Sausage 128
45. The Crumbs on the Table 129
46. The Cat and the Mouse in Partnership 130
47. The Spider and the Flea 132
48. The Wolf and the Seven Little Kids 134
49. The Wolf and the Fox 136
50. The Wolf and the Man 13!8
51. Gossip Wolf and the Fox 139
52. Little Red Riding Hood 140
53. How Mrs. Fox Married Again 143
54. The Fox and the Geese 146
55. The Fox and the Horse 147
56. The Fox and the Cat 148
57. The Sole 148
58. The Willow-Wren 149
59. The Willow- Wren and the Bear 152
60. The Little Folks' Presents 154 61. The Elf 156
62. The Foundling Bird 160
63. The Water of Life 162
64. The Water Sprite 167
65. The Table, the Ass, and the Stick 168
66. One-Eye, Two-Eyes, and Three-Eyes 176
67. The Knapsack, the Hat, and the Horn 183
68. Sweetheart Roland 187
69. The Devil's Three Gold Hairs 191 70. The Griflfin i97
71. The Sea-Hare 203 72. The Maiden Without Hands 205
73. The Pink 211
74. Mother Hulda 215
75. The True Bride 218
76. The Three Little Birds 223
jj. The Three Snake-Leaves 227
Contents vii
^ 78. The White Snake
79. The Three Spinners 231
80. Rumpelstiltskin 236 81. The Queen Bee
239
82. The Golden Goose 241 83. The Three Feathers
244
84. The Hut in the Forest
247
85. Donkey Cabbages 251
86. Snow-White and Rose-Red
257
87. The Poor Miller's Boy and the Cat 262 88. The Old Woman in the Wood
265
89. The Lambkin and the Little Fish
267
90. The Juniper Tree 268
91. Jorinda and Joringel 276
92. The Goose-Girl at the Well 278 93. The Three Little Men in the Wood 286 94. The White Bride and the Black Bride 290
95, Brother and Sister
294
96. The Gold Children
299
97. The Twin Brothers 304
98. Ferdinand the Faithful and Ferdinand the Unfaithful 324
99. The Three Black Princesses
328
100. Snow-White and the Seven Dwarfs
330
10 1. The Shoes That Were Danced to Pieces 337
102. The Boots of Buffalo Leather
340
103. The Six Servants 343
104. Six Soldiers of Fortune 349
105. The Two Travelers 353
106. The Ear of Com
361
107. The Aged Mother
362
108. The Hazel Branch 363
109. The Old Grandfather's Comer 364
110. The Ungrateful Son 364
111. The Bittern and the Hoopoe 365
112. The Three Languages
366
113. The Star Money
368
114. The Poor Man and the Rich Man
368
115. The Stolen Pennies
372
116. The Shroud 373
117. The Wilful Child 373 118. The Rose 374
119. The Tailor in Heaven 374
viii Contents
120. Poverty and Humility Lead to Heaven 376
121. The Flail from Heaven 377
122. The Moon 378
123. The Peasant in Heaven 380
124. Eve's Various Children 380 125. The Pooi Bo> in the Grave 382
126. Our Lady's Child 385 127. Gambling Hansel 388
128. The Old Man Made Young Again 391
129. The Loids Animals and the Devil's 392 130. Master Pfriem 393
131. The Heavenly Wedding 396
132. God's Food 397 133. St. Joseph in the Forest 398
134. The Three Green Twigs 400
135. Our Lady's Little Glass 402 136. Brother Frolick 403
137. The Bright Sun Brings It to Light 411
138. The Sparrow and His Four Children 413
139. The Duration of Life 415
140. The Twelve Apostles 416
141. Faithful John 417
142. The Six Swans 424
143. The Seven Ravens 428
144. The Twelve Brothers 431
145. Iron John 435
146. The King's Son Who Feared Nothing 441 147. The Drummer 446
148. The Two Kings' Children 454 149. The Iron Stove 461
150. The Singing, Soaring Lark 465
151. The Nixie of the Mill-Pond 470
152. The Raven 474
153. The Crystal Ball 479
154. The Donkey 481
155. Hans the Hedgehog 484
156. The King of the Golden Mountain 488
157. The Golden Bird 493
158. Strong Hans 500
159. The Blue Light 505
160. The Fisherman and His Wife 509
i6i. The Good Bargain 515
Contents jx
162. Prudent Hans
163. Hans in Luck 519 523
164. Clever Else 527
165. Hans Married
530
166. The Youth Who Could Not Shiver and Shake
532
167. Fred and Kate
541
168. Wise Folks 547
169. The Lazy Spinner
550
170. The Three Sluggards
552
171. The Twelve Idle Servants 553
172. La2y Harry 555
173. Odds and Ends 557 174. Brides on Trial
558
175. The Spindle, the Shuttle, and the Needle
558
176. The Peasant's Wise Daughter
561
177. The Shepherd Boy 564
178. The Master-Thief 565
179. The Three Brothers
571
180. The Four Skilful Brothers
572
181. Tales of Snakes
576
182. The Turnip 577
183. The Twelve Huntsmen
580
184. The Maid of Brakel 583
185. Going Traveling 583 186. Knoist and His Three Sons 584
187. The Story of Schlauraffen Land 585 188. The Ditmarsch Tale of Wonders
586
189. Domestic Servants
586
190. The Rogue and His Master 587
191. The Wise Servant 589
192. The Seven Swabians 589 193. Lean Lisa
592
194. Godfather Death 593
195. Death's Messengers
596
196. The Wonderful Glass 597
197. The Old Witch 599
198. The Devil's Sooty Brother
600
199. Bearskin 602
200. The Devil and His Grandmother 606 201. The Grave Mound
609
202. The Peasant and the Devil 612
203. The Three Apprentices
613
X Contents
204. Doctor Knowall 616
205. The Three Army Surgeons 617
206. The Spirit in the Bottle 620
207. The Three Children of Fortune 623
208. The Cunning Little Tailor 626
209. The Riddle 628
210. A Riddling Tale 631 211. The Beam 631
Complete GRIMM'S Fairy Tales

The Frog Prince
Long ago, when wishes often came true, there lived a King whose
daughters were all handsome, but the youngest was so beautiful
that the sun himself, who has seen everything, was bemused every
time he shone over her because of her beauty. Near the royal castle
there was a great dark wood, and in the wood under an old linden
tree was a well; and when the day was hot, the King's daughter used to go forth into the wood and sit by the brink of the cool well,
and if the time seemed long, she would take out a golden ball, and
throw it up and catch it again, and this was her favorite pastime.
Now it happened one day that the golden ball, instead of falling
back into the maiden's little hand which had sent it aloft, dropped
to the ground near the edge of the well and rolled in. The King's daughter followed it with her eyes as it sank, but the well was
deep, so deep that the bottom could not be seen. Then she began to
weep, and she wept and wept as if she could never be comforted.
And in the midst of her weeping she heard a voice saying to her,
''What ails you. King's daughter? Your tears would melt a heart of
stone." And when she looked to see where the voice came from, there
was nothing but a frog stretching his thick ugly head out of the
water. "Oh, is it you, old waddler?" said she; "I weep because my
golden ball has fallen into the well."
"Never mind, do not weep," answered the frog; *T can help you;
but what will you give me if I fetch up your ball again?"
"Whatever you like, dear frog," said she; "any of my clothes, my
pearls and jewels, or even the golden crown that I wear."
"Your clothes, your pearls and jewels, and your golden crown are
not for me," answered the frog; 'TDut if you would love me, and have me for your companion and play-fellow, and let me sit by you
at table, and eat from your plate, and drink from yoiur cup, and
2 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
sleep in your little bed— if you would promise all this, then would I
dive below the water and fetch you your golden ball again."
"Oh yes," she answered; "I will promise it all, whatever you
want; if you will only get me my ball again." But she thought to
herself, "What nonsense he tallcsl as if he could do anything but sit in the water and croak with the other frogs, or could possibly be any
one's companion." But the frog, as soon as he heard her promise, drew his head
luider the water and sank down out of sight, but after a while he
came to the surface again with the ball in his mouth, and he threw
it on the grass.
The King's daughter was overjoyed to see her pretty plaything again, and she caught it up and ran oflF with it.
"Stop, stop!" cried the frog; "take me up too; I cannot run as fast
as you!" But it was of no use, for croak, croak after her as he might, she
would not listen to him, but made haste home, and very soon forgot
all about the poor frog, who had to betake himself to his well again.
The next day, when the King's daughter was sitting at table with the King and all the court, and eating from her golden plate, there
came something pitter-patter up the marble stairs, and then there
came a knocking at the door, and a voice crying, "Yoimgest King's
daughter, let me in!" And she got up and ran to see who it could be, but when she
opened the door, there was the frog sitting outside. Then she shut
the door hastily and went back to her seat, feeling very imeasy.
The King noticed how quickly her heart was beating, and said,
"My child, what are you afraid of? Is there a giant standing at the
door ready to carry you away?" "Oh no," answered she; "no giant,
but a horrid frog." "And what does the frog want?" asked the King.
"O dear father," answered she, "when I was sitting by the well yesterday, and playing with my golden ball, it fell into the water,
and while I was crying for the loss of it, the frog came and got it
again for me on condition I would let him be my companion, but I
never thought that he could leave the water and come after me; but
now there he is outside the door, and he wants to come in to me." And then they all heard him knocking the second time and
crying,
"youngest King's daughter. Open to me! By the well water
What promised you me?
The Frog Prince 3
Youngest King's daughter
Now open to meF'
"That which thou hast promised must thou perform," said the
King; "so go now and let him in." So she went and opened the door, and the frog hopped in, following at her heels, till she reached her chair. Then he stopped and
cried, "Lift me up to sit by you." But she delayed doing so until the King ordered her. When once
the frog was on the chair, he wanted to get on the table, and there
he sat and said, "Now push your golden plate a little nearer, so that
we may eat together." And so she did, but everybody might see how unwilling she was,
and the frog feasted heartily, but every morsel seemed to stick in her throat.
"I have had enough now," said the frog at last, "and as I am tired, you must carry me to your room, and make ready your silken
bed, and we will lie down and go to sleep."
Then the King's daughter began to weep, and was afraid of the cold frog, that nothing would satisfy him but he must sleep in her
pretty clean bed. Now the King grew angry with her, saying, "That which thou hast promised in thy time of necessity, must thou now
perform." So she picked up the frog with her finger and thumb, carried him
upstairs and put him in a comer, and when she had lain down to
sleep, he came creeping up, saying, "I am tired and want sleep as
much as you; take me up, or I wiU tell your father." Then she felt beside herself with rage, and picking him up, she
threw him with all her strength against the wall, crying, "Now will
you be quiet, you horrid frogi" But as he fell, he ceased to be a frog, and became all at once a
Prince with beautiful kind eyes. And it came to pass that, with her
father s consent, they became bride and bridegroom. And he told
her how a wicked witch had bound him by her spells, and how no
one but she alone could have released him, and that they two
would go together to his father's kingdom. And there came to the door a carriage drawn by eight white horses, with white plumies on
their heads, and with golden harness, and behind the carriage was
standing faithful Henry, the servant of the young Prince.
Now, faithful Henry had suffered such care and pain when his
master was turned into a frog, that he had been obliged to wear
three iron bands over his heart, to keep it from breaking with trou-
4 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
ble and anxiety. When the carriage started to take the Prince to his
kingdom, and faithful Henry had helped them both in, he got up
behind, and was full of joy at his master's deliverance. And when they had gone a part of the way, the Prince heard a sound at the
back of the carriage, as if something had broken, and he turned
round and cried, "Henry, the wheel must be breakingl" but Henry answered,
"The wheel does not break,
'Tis the hand round my heart That, to lessen its ache.
When I grieved for your sake,
I bound round my heart."
Again, and yet once again there was the same sound, and the
Prince thought it must be the wheel breaking. But it was the breaking of the other bands from faithful Henry's heart, because he was so relieved and happy.
The Gallant Tailor
One summer morning a little tailor was sitting on his board near
the window, and working cheerfully with all his might, when an
old woman came down the street crying, "Good jelly to selll Good
jelly to selll"
The cry soimded pleasant in the little tailor's ears, so he put his
head out of the window, and called out, "Here, my good womancome here, if you want a customer." So the poor woman cHmbed the steps with her heavy basket, and
was obliged to impack and display all her pots to the tailor. He
looked at every one of them, and lifting all the lids, applied his
nose to each, and said at last, "The jelly seems pretty good; you
may weigh me out four half ounces, or I don't mind having a quarter of a pound." The woman, who had expected to find a good customer, gave
him what he asked for, but went off angry and grumbling.
"This jelly is the very thing for me," cried the little tailor; "it will
give me strength and cunning"; and he took down the bread from the cupboard, cut a whole round of the loaf, and spread the jelly on
The Gallant Tailor 5
it, laid it near him, and went on stitching more gallantly than ever.
All the while the scent of the sweet jelly was spreading throughout
the room, where there were quantities of flies, who were attracted
by it and flew to partake.
"Now then, who asked you to come?" said the tailor, and drove the unbidden guests away. But the flies, not understanding his lan- guage, were not to be got rid of like that, and returned in larger
numbers than before. Then the tailor, not being able to stand it any
longer, took from his chimney-comer a ragged cloth, and saying,
"Now, I'll let you have itl" beat it among them unmercifully. When he ceased, and counted the slain, he found seven lying dead before
him. "This is indeed somewhat," he said, wondering at his own gallantry; "the whole town shall know this." So he hastened to cut out a belt, and he stitched it, and put on it
in large capitals, "Seven at one blowl" "—The town, did I sayl" said
the Httle tailor; "the whole world shall know itl" And his heart
quivered with joy, like a lamb's tail. The tailor fastened the belt round him, and began to think of
going out into the world, for his workshop seemed too small for his
worship. So he looked about in all the house for something that
would be useful to take with him, but he found nothing but an old
cheese, which he put in his pocket. Outside the door he noticed
that a bird had got caught in the bushes, so he took that and put it
in his pocket with the cheese. Then he set out gallantly on his way,
and as he was light and active he felt no fatigue.
The way led over a mountain and when he 1 cached the topmost
peak he saw a terrible giant sitting there and looking about him at
his ease. The tailor went bravely up to him, called out to him, and
said, "Comrade, good day! There you sit looking over the Made world! I am on the way thither to seek my fortune; have you a
fancy to go with me?"
The giant looked at the tailor contemptuously, and said, "You lit- tle rascall You miserable fellowl"
"That may be!" answered the little tailor, and undoing his coat
he showed the giant his belt; "you can read there whether I am a
man or not!"
The giant read: "Seven at one blow!" and thinking it meant men that the tailor had killed, felt at once more respect for the little
fellow. But as he wanted to prove him, he took up a stone and
squeezed it so hard that water came out of it. "Now you can do
that," said the giant— "that is, if you have the strength for it."
"That's not much," said the little tailor, "1 call that play," and he
6 Grimms Complete Fairy Tales
put his hand in his pocket and took out the cheese and squeezed it,
so that the whey ran out of it. "Well," said he, "what do you think
of that?" The giant did not know what to say to it, for he could not have
believed it of the little man. Then the giant took up a stone and
threw it so high that it was nearly out of sight. "Now, little fellow,
suppose you do that!"
"Well thrown," said the tailor; "but the stone fell back to earth
again— I will throw you one that vnll never come back." So he felt in his pocket, took out the bird, and threw it into the air. And the
bird, when it found itself at liberty, took wing, flew off, and returned no more. "What do you think of that, comrade?" asked the tailor.
"There is no doubt that you can throw," said the giant; "but we
vidll see if you can carry." He led the little tailor to a mighty oak tree which had been
feUed, and was lying on the ground, and said, "Now, if you are
strong enough, help me to carry this tree out of the wood."
"Willingly," answered the Httle man; "you take the trunk on your shoulders, I vnU. take the branches with all their foliage, that is
much the most diflBcult." So the giant took the trunk on his shoulders, and the tailor seated
himself on a branch, and the giant, who could not see what he was
doing, had the whole tree to carry, and the little man on it as well.
And the little man was very cheerful and merry, and whistled the
tune: "There were three tailors riding by" as if carrying the tree
was mere child's play. The giant, when he had struggled on under
his heavy load a part of the way, was tired out, and cried, "Look
here, I must let go the treel" The tailor jumped off quickly, and taking hold of the tree with
both arms, as if he were carrying it, said to the giant, "You see you
can't carry the tree though you are such a big fellowl" They went on together a little farther, and presently they came to
a cherry tree, and the giant took hold of the topmost branches,
where the ripest fruit hung, and pulling them downwards, gave
them to the tailor to hold, bidding him eat. But the little tailor was
much too weak to hold the tree, and as the giant let go, the tree
sprang back, and the tailor was caught up into the air. And when
he dropped down again without any damage, the giant said to him,
"How is this? Haven't you strength enough to hold such a weak
sprig as that?"
'Tt is not strength that is lacking," answered the little tailor;
The Gallant Tailor 7
*Tiow should it be to one who has slain seven at one blowl I just jumped over the tree because the hunters are shooting down there
in the bushes. You jump it too, if you can." The giant made the attempt, and not being able to vault the tree,
he remained hanging in the branches, so that once more the little
tailor got the better of him. Then said the giant, "As you are such a gallant fellow, suppose you come with me to oiur den, and stay the
night." The tailor was quite willing, and he followed him. When they
reached the den there sat some other giants by the fire, and each
had a roasted sheep in his hand, and was eating it. The little tailor
looked round and thought, There is more elbow-room here than in
my workshop." And the giant showed him a bed, and told him he had better lie
down upon it and go to sleep. The bed was, however, too big for
the tailor, so he did not stay in it, but crept into a comer to sleep.
As soon as it was midnight the giant got up, took a great staff of
iron and beat the bed through with one stroke, and supposed he
had made an end of that grasshopper of a tailor. Very early in the
morning the giants went into the wood and forgot all about the little tailor, and when they saw him coming after them alive and
merry, they were terribly frightened, and, thinking he was going to
Idll them, they ran away in all haste.
So the httle tailor marched on, always following his nose. And
after he had gone a great way he entered the court-yard belonging
to a King's palace, and there he felt so overpowered with fatigue that he lay down and fell asleep. In the meanwhile came various
people, who looked at him very curiously, and read on his belt,
"Seven at one blowl"
"Ohl" said they, "why should this great lord come here in time of
peace? What a mighty champion he must bel" Then they went and told the King about him, and they thought
that if war should break out what a worthy and useful man he
would be, and that he ought not to be allowed to depart at any
price. The King then summoned his council, and sent one of his
courtiers to the little tailor to beg him, as soon as he should wake
up, to consent to serve in the King's army. So the messenger stood
and waited at the sleeper's side until his limbs began to stretch, and his eyes to open, and then he carried his answer back. And the answer was: "That was the reason for which I came. I am ready to
enter the King's service."
8 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
So he was received into it very honorably, and a separate dwelling set apart for him.
But the rest of the soldiers were very much set against the little
tailor, and they wished him a thousand miles away. "What shall be
done about it?" they said among themselves; "if we pick a quarrel and fight with him then seven of us will fall at each blow. That will
be of no good to us." So they came to a resolution, and went all together to the King
to ask for their discharge. "We never intended," said they, "to serve with a man who kills seven at a blow." The King felt sorry to lose all his faithful servants because of one
man, and he wished that he had never seen him, and would willingly get rid of him if he might. But he did not dare to dismiss the
httle tailor for fear he should kiU all the King's people, and place himself upon the throne. He thought a long while about it, and at
last made up his mind what to do. He sent for the Httle tailor, and
told him that as he was so great a warrior he had a proposal to make to him. He told him that in a wood in his dominions dwelt two
giants, who did great damage by robbery, murder, and fire, and
that no man durst go near them for fear of his life. But that if the
tailor should overcome and slay both these giants the King would
give him his only daughter in marriage, and half his kingdom as
dowry, and that a hundred horsemen should go with him to give him assistance.
"That would be something for a man like mel" thought the Httle
tailor, "a beautiful Princess and half a kingdom are not to be had
every day," and he said to the King, "Oh yes, I can soon overcome the giants, and yet have no need of the hundred horsemen; he who
can Idll seven at one blow has no need to be afraid of two." So the Httle tailor set out, and the hundred horsemen followed
him. When he came to the border of the wood he said to his escort,
"Stay here while I go to attack the giants." Then he sprang into the wood, and looked about him right and
left. After a while he caught sight of the two giants; they were
lying down under a tree asleep, and snoring so that aU the branches
shook. The Httle tailor, all aHve, filled both his pockets with stones
and cHmbed up into the tree, and made his way to an overhanging
bough, so that he could seat himself just above the sleepers; and from there he let one stone after another fall on the chest of one of
the giants. For a long time the giant was quite unaware of this, but
at last he waked up and pushed his comrade, and said, "What are
you hitting me for?"
The Gallant Tailor 9
"You are dreaming," said the other, "I am not touching you." And they composed themselves again to sleep, and the tailor let fall
a stone on the other giant.
"What can that be?" cried he, "what are you casting at me?" "I
am casting nothing at you," answered the first, grumbhng. They disputed about it for a while, but as they were tired, they
gave it up at last, and their eyes closed once more. Then the little
tailor began his game anew, picked out a heavier stone and threw it
down with force upon the first giant's chest.
"This is too muchl" cried he, and sprang up like a madman and struck his companion such a blow that the tree shook above them.
The other paid him back with ready coin, and they fought with
such fury that they tore up trees by their roots to use for weapons
against each other, so that at last they both of them lay dead upon
the ground. And now the little tailor got down.
"Another piece of luckl" said he, "that the tree I was sitting in did not get torn up too, or else I should have had to jump like a
squirrel from one tree to another." Then he drew his sword and gave each of the giants a few hacks
in the breast, and went back to the horsemen and said, "The deed is done, I have made an end of both of them, but it went hard with
me; in the struggle they rooted up trees to defend themselves, but
it was of no use, they had to do with a man who can kill seven at
one blow."
"Then are you not wounded?" asked the horsemen. "Nothing of
the sortl" answered the tailor, "I have not turned a hair." The horsemen still would not believe it, and rode into the wood
to see, and there they found the giants wallowing in their blood,
and all about them lying the uprooted trees.
The little tailor then claimed the promised boon, but the King
repented him of his offer, and he sought again how to rid himself of
the hero. "Before you can possess my daughter and the half of my
kingdom," said he to the tailor, "you must perform another heroic act. In the wood lives a unicorn who does great damage; you must
secure him."
"A unicorn does not strike more terror into me than two giants.
Seven at one blow!— that is my way," was the tailor's answer. So, taking a rope and an axe with him, he went out into the
wood, and told those who were ordered to attend him to wait out- side. He had not far to seek, the unicorn soon came out and sprang
at him, as if he would make an end of him without delay. "Softly,
softly," said he "most haste, worst speed," and remained standing
10 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
until the animal came quite near, then he slipped quietly behind a
tree. The unicorn ran wi^ all his might against the tree and stuck
his horn so deep into the trunk that he could not get it out again, and so was taken.
"Now I have you," said the tailor, coming out from behind the
tree, and, putting the rope round the unicorn's neck, he took the axe, set free the horn, and when all his party were assembled he led
forth the animal and brought it to the King.
The King did not yet wish to give him the promised reward, and
set him a third task to do. Before the wedding could take place the
tailor was to secure a wild boar which had done a great deal of
damage in the wood. The huntsmen were to accompany him.
"All right," said the tailor, "this is child's play." But he did not take the huntsmen into the wood, and they were
all the better pleased, for the wild boar had many a time before received them in such a way that they had no fancy to disturb him.
When the boar caught sight of the tailor he ran at him with foaming mouth and gleaming tusks to bear him to the ground, but the
nimble hero rushed into a chapel which chanced to be near, and
jumped quickly out of a window on the other side. The boar ran
after him, and when he got inside the door shut after him, and
there he was imprisoned, for the creature was too big and un- wieldy to jimip out of the window too. Then the Uttle tailor called
the huntsmen that they might see the prisoner with their own eyes;
and then he betook himself to the King, who now, whether he liked
it or not, was obliged to fulfil his promise, and give him his daugh- ter and the half of his kingdom. But if he had known that the great
warrior was only a httle tailor he would have taken it still more to
heart. So the wedding was celebrated with great splendor and little
joy, and the tailor was made into a King.
One night the young Queen heard her husband talking in his
sleep and saying, "Now boy, make me that waistcoat and patch me those breeches, or I will lay my yard measure about your shoulders!" And so, as she perceived of what low birth her husband was, she
went to her father the next morning and told him all, and begged
him to set her free from a man who was nothing better than a tailor. The King bade her be comforted, saying, "Tonight leave your bedroom door open, my guard shall stand outside, and when he is
asleep they shall come in and bind him and carry him off to a ship,
and he shall be sent to the other side of the world."
So the wife felt consoled, but the King's water-bearer, who had
The Giant and the Tailor ii
been listening all the while, went to the little tailor and disclosed to
him the whole plan.
"I shall put a stop to all this," said he. At night he lay down as usual in bed, and when his wife thought
that he was asleep, she got up, opened the door and lay down
again. The little tailor, who only made believe he waa asleep, bei^an
to murmur plainly, "Now, boy, make me that waistcoat and patch me those breeches, or I will lay my yard measure about your shoulders! I have slain seven at one blow, killed two giants, caught a uni- corn, and taken a wild boar, and shall I be afraid of those who are
standing outside my room door?" And when they heard the tailor say this, a great fear seized them;
they fled away as if they had been wild hares, and none of them would venture to attack him.
And so the little tailor remained a King all his lifetime.
The Giant and the Tailor
A CERTAIN TAILOR who was great at boasting but poor at doing, took
it into his head to go abroad for a while, and look about the world.
As soon as he could manage it, he left his workshop, and wandered
on his way, over hill and dale, sometimes hither, sometimes thither,
but ever on and on. Once when he was out he perceived in the blue
distance a steep hill, and behind it a tower reaching to the clouds,
which rose up out of a wild dark forest. "Thunder and lightning,"
cried the tailor, "what is that?" and as he was strongly goaded by curiosity, he went boldly towards it. But what made the tailor open
his eyes and mouth when he came near it, was to see that the tower
had legs, and leapt in one bound over the steep hill, and was now
standing as an all-powerful giant before him.
"What do you want here, you little fly's leg?" cried the giant, v^th a voice as if it were thundering on every side. The tailor
whimpered, "I want just to look about and see if I can earn a bit of
bread for myself in this forest." "If that is what you are after," said
the giant, "you may have a place with me." "If it must be why
not? What wages shall I receive?" "You shall hear what wages you shall have. Every year three hundred and sixty-five days, and when
it is leap-year, one more into the bargain. Does that suit you?" "AH
12 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
right," replied the tailor, and thought, in his own mind, "a man must cut his coat according to his cloth; I will try to get away as
fast as I can."
On this the giant said to him, "Go, little ragamuffin, and fetch me
a jug of water." "Had I not better bring the well itself at once, and
the spring too?" asked the boaster, and went with the pitcher to the
water. "WhatI the well and the spring too," growled the giant in his beard, for he was rather clownish and stupid, and began to be
afraid. "That knave is not a fool, he has a wizard in his body. Be on
your guard, old Hans, this is no serving-man for you." When the tailor had brought the water, the giant bade him go
into the forest, and cut a couple of blocks of wood and bring them
back. "Why not the whole forest at once, with one stroke. The whole forest, young and old, with all that is there, both rough and
smooth?" asked the little tailor, and went to cut the wood. "What! the whole forest, young and old, with all that is there, both rough
and smooth, and the well and its spring too," growled the credulous
giant in his beard, and was still more terrified. "The knave can do much more than bake apples, and has a wizard in his body. Be on
your guard, old Hans, this is no serving-man for youl" When the tailor had brought the wood, the giant commanded
him to shoot two or three wild boars for supper. "Why not rather a
thousand at one shot, and bring them all here?" inquired the ostentatious tailor. "Whatl" cried the timid giant in great terror. "Let
well alone tonight, and lie down to rest." The giant was so terribly alarmed that he could not close an eye
all night long for thinking what would be the best way to get rid of
this accursed sorcerer of a servant. Time brings counsel. Next
morning the giant and the tailor went to a marsh, round which
stood a number of willow trees. Then said the giant, "Hark you, tailor, seat yourself on one of the willow-branches, I long of aU
things to see if you are big enough to bend it down." All at once the tailor was sitting on it, holding his breath, and making himself so
heavy that the bough bent down. When, however, he was compelled to draw breath, it hurried him (for unfortunately he had not
put his goose in his pocket) so high into the air that he never was
seen again, and this to the great delight of the giant. If the tailor
has not fallen down again, he must stiU be hovering about in the air.
The Little Farmer
There was a certain village where lived many rich farmers and
only one poor one, whom they called the Little Farmer. He had not
even a cow, and still less had he money to buy one; and he and his
vidfe greatly wished for such a thing. One day he said to her, "Lis- ten, I have a good idea; it is that your godfather the joiner shall
make us a calf of wood and paint it brown, so as to look just like
any other; and then in time perhaps it will grow big and become a
cow." This notion pleased the wife, and godfather joiner set to work to
saw and plane, and soon turned out a calf complete, with its head
down and neck stretched out as if it were grazing.
The next morning, as the cows were driven to pasture, the Little
Farmer called out to the drover, "Look here, I have got a little calf
to go, but it is still young and must be carried."
"All right!" said the drover, and tucked it imder his arm, carried it into the meadows, and stood it in the grass. So the calf stayed
where it was put, and seemed to be eating all the time, and the
drover thought to himself, 'It wiM soon be able to run alone, if it
grazes at that rate!" In the evening, when the herds had to be driven home, he said to
the calf, 'If you can stand there eating like that, you can just walk ofiF on your own four legs; I am not going to lug you imder my arm
again!" But the Little Farmer was standing by his house-door, and waiting for his calf; and when he saw the cow-herd coming through the
village v^dthout it, he asked what it meant. The cow-herd answered,
'It is stiU out there eating away, and never attended to the call,
and would not come vvdth the rest."
Then the Little Farmer said, "I wiH teU you what, I must have
my beast brought home." And they went together through the fields in quest of it, but
some one had stolen it, and it was gone. And the drover said,
"Mostly likely it has run away."
But the Little Farmer said, "Not it!" and brought the cow-herd before the bailiff, who ordered him for his carelessness to give the
Little Farmer a cow for the missing calf.
14 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
So now the Little Farmer and his wife possessed their longwished-for cow; they rejoiced with all their hearts, but unfortunately they had no fodder for it, and could give it nothing to eat, so
that before long they had to Idll it. Its flesh they salted down, and
the Little Fanner went to the town to sell the skin and buy a new
calf with what he got for it. On the way he came to a mill, where a
raven was sitting with broken wings, and he took it up out of pity
and wrapped it in the skin. The weather was very stormy, and it
blew and rained, so he turned into the mill and asked for shelter.
The miller s wife was alone in the house, and she said to the Little Farmer, "Well, come in and lie down in the straw," and she gave him a piece ot bread and cheese. So the Little Farmer ate, and
then lay down with his skin near him, and the miller's wife thought he was sleeping with fatigue. After a while in came another man,
and the miller's wife received him very well, saying, "My husband
is out; we will make good cheer." The Little Farmer Hstened to what they said, and when he heard
good cheer spoken of, he grew angry to think he had been put ofiE
with bread and cheese. For the miller's wife presently brought out roast meat, salad, cakes, and wine.
Now as the pair were sitting down to their feast, there came a
knock at the door. "Oh dear," cried the woman, "it is my husband!" In a twinkling she popped the roast meat into the oven, the wine
under the pillow, the salad in the bed, the cakes under the bed, and
the man in the linen-closet. Then she opened the door to her husband, saying, "Thank goodness, you are here I What weather it is,
as if the world were coming to an endl" When the miller saw the Little Farmer lying in the straw, he
said, "What fellow have you got there?" "Oh!" said the wife, "the poor chap came in the midst of the wind and rain and asked for
shelter, and I gave him some bread and cheese and spread some
straw for him."
The husband answered, "Oh well, I have no objection, only get
me something to eat at once." But the wife said, "There is nothing but bread and cheese."
"Anything will do for me," answered the miller, "bread and
cheese for ever!" and catching sight of the Little Farmer, he cried,
"Come along, and keep me company!" The Little Fanner did not wait to be asked twice, but sat down and ate.
After a while the miller noticed the sldn lying on the ground with
the raven wrapped up in it, and he said, "What have you got
there?" The Little Farmer answered, "A fortime-teller." And the
The Little Farmer 15
miller asked, "Can he teU my fortune?" "Why not?" answered the
Little Farmer. "He will tell four things, and the fifth he keeps to
himself." Now the miller became very curious, and said, "Ask him
to say something." And the Little Farmer pinched the raVen, so that it croaked,
"Crr, err." "What does he say?" asked the miller. And the Little
Farmer answered, "First he says that there is wine under the pillow."
"That would be jollyl" cried the miller, and he went to look, and
found the wine, and then asked, "What next?" So the Little Farmer made the raven croak again, and then said,
"He says, secondly, that there is roast meat in the oven."
"That would be jollyl" cried the miller, and he went and looked, and found the roast meat. The Little Farmer made the fortuneteller speak again, and then said, "He says, thirdly, that there is salad in the bed."
"That would be jollyl" cried the miller, and went and looked and found the salad. Once more the Little Farmer pinched the raven, so
that he croaked, and said, "He says, foiuthly and lastly, that there are cakes under the bed."
"That would be jollyl" cried the miller, and he went and looked, and found the cakes.
And now the two sat down to table, and the miller's wife felt very uncomfortable, and she went to bed and took all the keys with
her. The miller was eager to know what the fifth thing could be,
but the Little Farmer said, "Suppose we eat the four things in
peace first, for the fifth thing is a great deal worse." So they sat and ate, and while they ate, they bargained to- gether as to how much the miller would give for knowing the fifth
thing; and at last they agreed upon three hundred doUars. Then the
Little Farmer pinched the raven, so that he croaked aloud. And the
miller asked what he said, and the Little Farmer answered, "He
says that there is a demon in the linen-closet."
"Then," said the miller, "that demon must come out of the linencloset," and he unbarred the house-door, while the Little Farmer
got the key of the Unen-closet from the miller's wife, and opened it. Then the man rushed forth, and out of the house, and the miller
said, "1 saw the black rogue with my own eyes; so that is a good
riddance." And the Little Farmer took himself off by daybreak next morning with the three hundred dollars.
And after this the Little Farmer by degrees got on in the world.
i6 Grimms Complete Fairy Tales
and built himself a good house, and the other fanners said, "Surely the Little Fanner has been where it rains gold pieces, and has
brought home money by the bushel." And he was simimoned before the bailiff to say whence his riches
came. And all he said was, "I sold my calf s sldn for three hundred
dollars." When the other farmers heard this they wished to share such
good luck, and ran home, killed all their cows, skinned them in
order to sell them also for the same high price as the Little Farmer.
And the bailiff said, '1 must be beforehand with them." So he sent his servant into the town to the skin-buyer, and he only gave her three dollars for the sldn, and that was faring better than the
others, for when they came, they did not get as much as that, for
the sldn-buyer said, "What am I to do with all these skins?" Now the other farmers were very angry with the Little Farmer
for misleading them, and they vowed vengeance against him, and
went to complain of his deceit to the bailiff. The poor Little Farmer
was with one voice sentenced to death, and to be put into a cask
with holes in it, and rolled into the water. So he was led to execution, and a priest was fetched to say a mass for him, and the rest of
the people had to stand at a distance. As soon as the Little Farmer
caught sight of the priest he knew him for the man who was hid in
the linen-closet at the miller's. And he said to him, "As I let you out
of the cupboard, you must let me out of the cask." At that moment a shepherd passed with a flock of sheep, and
the Little Farmer knowing him to have a great wish to become
bailiff himself, called out with all his might, "No, I will not, and if
all the world asked me, I would noti" The shepherd, hearing him, came up and asked what it was he
would not do. The Little Farmer answered, "They want to make
me bailiff, if I sit in this cask, but I will not do it!"
The shepherd said, 'If that is all there is to do in order to be- come bailiff I will sit in the cask and welcome." And the Little
Farmer answered, "Yes, that is all, just you get into the cask, and you
will become bailiff." So the shepherd agreed, and got in, and the Little Farmer fastened on the top; then he collected the herd of
sheep and drove them away.
The priest went back to the parish-assembly, and told them the
mass had been said. Then they came and began to roll the cask into
the water, and as it went the shepherd inside called out, "I consent
to be bailiffl" They thought that it was the Little Farmer who spoke, and they
The Golden Key 17
answered, "All right; but first you must go down below and look
about you a little," and they rolled the cask into the water. Upon that the farmers went home, and when they reached the
village, there they met the Little Farmer driving a flock of sheep,
and looking quite calm and contented. The farmers were astonished
and cried, "Little Farmer, whence come you? How did you get out of the water?"
"Oh, easily," answered he, "I sank and sank until I came to the bottom; then I broke through the cask and came out of it, and there
were beautiful meadows and plenty of sheep feeding, so I brought
away this flock with me."
Then said the farmers, "Are there any left?" "Oh yes," answered
the Little Farmer, "more than you can possibly need." Then the farmers agreed that they would go and fetch some
sheep also, each man a flock for himself; and the baiUff said, "Me
first." And they all went together, and in the blue sky there were lit- tle fleecy clouds Hke lambkins, and they were reflected in the
water; and the farmers cried out, "There are the sheep down there
at the bottom."
When the baihff heard that he pressed forward and said, '1 will go first and look about me, and if things look well, I will call to
you." And he jiunped plump into the water, and they all thought
that the noise he made meant "Come," so the whole company jumped in one after the other.
So perished all the proprietors of the village, and the Little
Farmer, as sole heir, became a rich man.
The Golden Key
In the winter time, when deep snow lay on the groimd, a poor boy
was forced to go out on a sledge to fetch wood. When he had
gathered it together, and packed it, he wished, as he was so frozen
with cold, not to go home at once, but to light a fire and warm himself a Kttle. So he scraped away the snow, and as he was thus clearing the ground, he found a tiny, gold key. Hereupon he thought
that where the key was, the lock must be also, and dug in the
ground and foimd an iron chest. "If the key does but fit it!" thought
he; "no doubt there are precious things in that little box." He
i8 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
searched, but no keyhole was there. At last he discovered one, but
so small that it was hardly visible. He tried it, and the key fitted it
exactly. Then he turned it once round, and now we must wait until
he has quite unlocked it and opened the lid, and then we shall
learn what wonderful things were lying in that box.
Sharing Joy and Sorrow
There was once a tailor, who was a quarrelsome fellow, and his
vdfe, who was good, industrious, and pious, never could please him.
Whatever she did, he was not satisfied, but grumbled and scolded,
and knocked her about and beat her. As the authorities at last
heard of it, they had him summoned and put in prison in order to
make him better. He was kept for a while on bread and water, and
then set free again. He was forced, however, to promise not to beat
his wife any more, but to live with her in peace, and share joy and
sorrow with her, as married people ought to do.
All went on well for a time, but theil he fell into his old ways,
and was surly and quarrelsome. And because he dared not beat her,
he would seize her by the hair and tear it out. The woman escaped
from him, and sprang out into the yard, but he ran after her with
his yard-meastire and scissors, and chased her about, and threw the
yard-measure and scissors at her, and whatever else came in his
way. When he hit her he laughed, and when he missed her, he
stormed and swore. This went on so long that the neighbors came
to the wife's assistance.
The tailor was again simimoned before the magistrates, and reminded of his promise. "Dear gentlemen," said he, "I have kept my word; I have not beaten her, but have shared joy and sorrow with
her." "How can that be," said the judge, "when she continually
brings such heavy complaints against you?" "1 have not beaten her, but just because she looked so strange I wanted to comb her hair
with my hand; she, however, got away from me, and left me quite
spitefully. Then I hurried after her, and in order to bring her back
to her duty, I threw at her as a well-meant admonition whatever
came readily to hand. I have shared joy and sorrow with her also,
for whenever I hit her I was full of joy, and she of sorrow; and
Tom Thumb 19
if I missed her, then she was joyful, and I sorry." The judges were not satisfied with this answer, but gave him the reward he deserved.
The Nail
A MERCHAJ^ had done good business at the fair; he had sold his
wares, and lined his money-bags with gold and silver. Then he
wanted to travel homewards, and be in his own house before nightfall. So he packed his trunk with the money on his horse, and rode
away.
At noon he rested in a town, and when he wanted to go farther
the stable-boy brought out his horse and said, "A nail is wanting,
sir, in the shoe of its left hind foot." "Let it be wanting," answered
the merchant; "the shoe will certainly stay on for six miles I have
still to go. I am in a hiury." In the afternoon, when he once more alighted and had his horse
fed, the stable-boy went into the room to him and said, "Sir, a shoe
is missing from your horse's left hind foot. Shall I take him to the
blacksmith?" "Let it still be wanting," answered the man; "the horse can very well hold out for the couple of miles which remain.
I am in haste." He rode forth, but before long the horse began to limp. It had
not limped long before it began to stumble, and it had not stmnbled
long before it fell down and broke its leg. The merchant was forced
to leave the horse where it was, and unbuckle the trunk, take it on
his back, and go home on foot. And there he did not arrive until
quite late at night. "And that unlucky nail," said he to himself, "has caused all this disaster." Make haste slowly.
Tom Thumb
There was once a poor countryman who used to sit in the chimneycomer all evening and poke the fire, while his wife sat at her spinning-wheel.
20 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
And he used to say, "How dull it is without any children about
US; our house is so quiet, and other people's houses so noisy and
merryl" "Yes," answered his wife, and sighed, "if we could only have one, and that one ever so little, no bigger than my thumb, how
happy I should be! It would, indeed, be having our heart's desire." Now, it happened that after a while the woman had a child who
was perfect in all his limbs, but no bigger than a thumb. Then the
parents said, "He is just what we wished for, and we love him very
much," and they named him according to his stature, "Tom
Thvmib." And though they gave him plenty of nourishment, he grew no bigger, but remained exactly the same size as when he was
first bom; and he had very good faculties, and was very quick and
prudent, so that all he did prospered.
One day his father made ready to go into the forest to cut wood,
and he said, as if to himself, "Now, I wish there was some one to
bring the cart to me." "O father," cried Tom Thumb, "if I can
bring the cart, let me alone for that, and in proper time, too!"
Then the father laughed, and said, "How will you manage that?
You are much too Httle to hold the reins." "That has nothing to do with it, father; while my mother goes on with her spinning I will sit
in the horse's ear and tell him where to go." "Well," answered the
father, "we will try it for once." When it was time to set off, the mother went on spinning, after
setting Tom Thumb in the horse's ear; and so he drove off, crying,
"Gee-up, gee-wo!" So the horse went on quite as if his master were driving him, and
drew the wagon along the right road to the wood.
Now it happened just as they tinned a comer, and the little
fellow was calling out "Gee-up!" that two strange men passed by.
"Look," said one of them, "how is this? There goes a wagon, and
the driver is calling to the horse, and yet he is nowhere to be seen."
*Tt is very strange," said the other; "we will follow the wagon, and
see where it belongs." And the wagon went right through the forest, up to the place
where the wood had been hewed. When Tom Thumb caught sight
of his father, he cried out, 'Xook, father, here am I with the wagon;
now, take me down." The father held the horse with his left hand, and with the right
he lifted down his little son out of the horse's ear, and Tom Thumb sat down on a stump, quite happy and content. When the two
strangers saw him they were struck dumb with wonder. At last one
Tom Thumb 21
of them, taking the other aside, said to him, "Look here, the little chap would make our fortune if we were to show him in the town
for money. Suppose we buy him."
So they went up to the woodcutter, and said, "Sell the little man
to US; we will take care he shall come to no harm." "No," answered
the father; "he is the apple of my eye, and not for all the money in the world would I sell him." But Tom Thmnb, when he heard what was going on, climbed up
by his father's coat tails, and, perching himself on his shoulder, he
whispered in his ear, "Father, you might as well let me go. I will
soon come back again." Then the father gave him up to the two men for a large piece of
money. They asked him where he would hke to sit. "Oh, put me on
the brim of your hat," said he. "There I can walk about and view
the country, and be in no danger of falling off." So they did as he wished, and when Tom Thumb had taken leave
of his father, they set off all together. And they traveled on until it
grew dusk, and the little fellow asked to be set down a little while
for a change, and after some diflBculty they consented. So the man
took him down from his hat, and set him in a field by the roadside,
and he ran away directly, and, after creeping about among the furrows, he slipped suddenly into a mouse-hole, just what he was looking for.
"Good evening, my masters, you can go home without me!" cried he to them, laughing. They ran up and felt about with their sticks
in the mouse-hole, but in vain. Tom Thumb crept farther and farther in, and as it was growing dark, they had to make the best of
their way home, full of vexation, and with empty piurses.
When Tom Thumb found they were gone, he crept out of his
hiding-place underground. "It is dangerous work groping about
these holes in the darkness," said he; "1 might easily break my
neck."
But by good fortime he came upon an empty snail shell. "That's
all right," said he. "Now I can get safely through the night"; and he settled himself down in it.
Before he had time to get to sleep, he heard two men pass by,
and one was saying to the other, "How can we manage to get hold
of the rich parson's gold and silver?" "I can tell you how," cried
Tom Thumb. "How is this?" said one of the thieves, quite frightened, "I hear some one speaki" So they stood still and listened, and Tom Thmnb spoke again:
"Take me with you; I will show you how to do it!" "Where are
22 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
you, then?" asked they. "Look about on the ground and notice
where the voice comes from," answered he.
At last they found him, and lifted him up. "You little elf," said
they, "how can you help us?" "Look here," answered he, "I can
easily creep between the iron bars of the parson's room and hand
out to you whatever you would Hke to have." "Very well," said
they, "we will try what you can do." So when they came to the parsonage-house, Tom Thumb crept
into the room, but cried out with all his might, "Will you have all
that is here?" So the thieves were terrified, and said, "Do speak
more softly, lest any one should be awaked." But Tom Thumb made as if he did not hear them, and cried out
again, "What would you like? Will you have all that is here?" so that the cook, who was sleeping in a room hard by, heard it, and
raised herself in bed and listened. The thieves, however, in their
fear of being discovered, had run back part of the way, but they
took courage again, thinking that it was only a jest of the Uttle
fellow's. So they came back and whispered to him to be serious, and to hand them out something.
Then Tom Thumb called out once more as loud as he could, "Oh
yes, I will give it all to you, only put out your hands." Then the listening maid heard him distinctly that time, and
jumped out of bed, and burst open the door. The thieves ran off as
if the wild huntsman were behind them; but the maid, as she could
see nothing, went to fetch a light. And when she came back with
one, Tom Thumb had taken himself off, without being seen by her,
into the bam; and the maid, when she had looked in every hole and
corner and found nothing, went back to bed at last, and thought
that she must have been dreaming with her eyes and ears open.
So Tom Thumb crept among the hay, and found a comfortable
nook to sleep in, where he intended to remain until it was day, and
then to go home to his father and mother. But other things were to
befall him; indeed, there is nothing but trouble and worry in this worldl
The maid got up at dawn of day to feed the cows. The first place
she went to was the bam, where she took up an armful of hay, and
it happened to be the very heap in which Tom Thumb lay asleep.
And he was so fast asleep, that he was aware of nothing, and never
waked until he was in the mouth of the cow, who had taken him up
with the hay.
"Oh dear," cried he, "how is it that I have got into a mill!" but he soon found out where he was, and he had to be very careful not
Tom Thumb 23
to get between the cow's teeth, and at last he had to descend into
the cow's stomach. "The windows were forgotten when this little
room was built," said he, "and the sunshine cannot get in; there is no
light to be had." His quarters were in every way unpleasant to him, and, what was
the worst, new hay was constantly coming in, and the space was
being filled up. At last he cried out in his extremity, as loud as he
could, "No more hay for me! No more hay for me!" The maid was then milking the cow, and as she heard a voice, but could see no
one, and as it was the same voice that she had heard in the night,
she was so frightened that she fell off her stool, and spilt the milk.
Then she ran in great haste to her master, crying, "Oh, master dear,
the cow spoke!"
"You must be crazy," answered her master,' and he went himself to the cow-house to see what was the matter. No sooner had he put
his foot inside the door, than Tom Thumb cried out again, "No
more hay for mel No more hay for me!" Then the parson himself was frightened, supposing that a bad
spirit had entered into the cow, and he ordered her to be put to
death. So she was kiUed, but the stomach, where Tom Thiunb was
lying, was thrown upon a dunghill. Tom Thumb had great trouble
to work his way out of it, and he had just made a space big enough
for his head to go through, when a new misfortune happened. A
hungry wolf ran up and swallowed the whole stomach at one gulp.
But Tom Thumb did not lose courage. "Perhaps," thought he,
"the wolf will listen to reason," and he cried out from the inside of
the wolf, "My dear wolf, I can tell you where to get a splendid meal!" "Where is it to be had?" asked the wolf. "In such and such a house, and you must creep into it through the drain, and there you
will find cakes and bacon and broth, as much as you can eat," and he described to him his father's house. The wolf needed not to be told twice. He squeezed himself
through the drain in the night, and feasted in the store-room to his
heart's content. When at last he was satisfied, he wanted to go away again, but he had become so big, that to creep the same way back
was impossible. This Tom Thumb had reckoned upon, and began
to make a terrible din inside the wolf, crying and calling as loud as he could.
"Will you be quiet?" said the wolf; "you will wake the folks up!"
"Look here," cried the little man, "you are very well satisfied, and
now I will do something for my own enjoyment," and began again to make all the noise he could.
24 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
At last the father and mother were awakened, and they ran to the
room-door and peeped through the chink, and when they saw a
wolf in ocxjupation, they ran and fetched weapons— the man an axe,
and the wife a scythe. *'Stay behind," said the man, as they entered
the room; "when I have given him a blow, and it does not seem to
have killed him, then you must cut at him with your scythe."
Then Tom Thumb heard his father s voice, and cried, "Dear father, I am here in the wolfs inside."
Then the father called out full of joy, 'Thank heaven that we
have found our dear child!" and told his wife to keep the scythe out of the way, lest Tom Thumb should be hurt with it. Then he drew near and struck the wolf such a blow on the head that he fell
down dead; and then he fetched a knife and a pair of scissors, slit
up the wolfs body, and let out the little fellow.
"Oh, what anxiety we have felt about youl" said the father. "Yes, father, I have seen a good deal of the world, and I am very glad to
breathe fresh air again."
"And where have you been aU this time?" asked his father. "Oh,
I have been in a mouse-hole and a snail's shell, in a cow's stomach
and a wolfs inside; now I think I will stay at home."
"And we will not part with you for all the kingdoms of the world," cried the parents, as they kissed and hugged their dear little Tom
Thumb. And they gave him something to eat and drink, and a new
suit of clothes, as his old ones were soiled with travel.
Tom Thumb's Travels
Thebe was once a tailor who had a son no higher than a thumb, so
he was called Tom Thumb. Notwithstanding his small size, he had
plenty of spirit, and one day he said to his father, "Father, go out into the world I must and will."
"Very well, my son," said the old man, and taking a long darning
needle, he put a knob of sealing-wax on the end, saying, "Here is a
sword to take with you on your journey." Now the little tailor wanted to have one more meal first, and so
he trotted into the kitchen to see what sort of farewell feast his
mother had cooked for him. It was all ready, and the dish was
Tom Thumb's Travels 25
standing on the hearth. Then said he, "Mother, what is the fare
today?" **You can see for yourself," said the mother. Then Tom Thumb ran to the hearth and peeped into the dish, but as he stretched his
neck too far over it, the steam caught him and carried him up the
chimney. For a time he floated about with the steam in the air, but
at last he sank down to the ground. Then the little tailor found himself out in the wide world, and he wandered about, and finally engaged himself to a master tailor, but the food was not good enough for him.
"Mistress," said Tom Thumb, "if you do not give us better vic- tuals, I shall go out early in the morning and write with a piece of
chalk on the house-door, 'Plenty of potatoes to eat, and but little
meat; so good-bye, Mr. Potato.'"
"What are you after, grasshopper?" said the mistress, and growing angry she seized a piece of rag to beat him o£F; but he crept un- derneath her thimble, and then peeped at her, and put his tongue
out at her. She took up the thimble, and would have seized him,
but he hopped among the rags, and as the mistress turned them
over to find him, he stepped into a crack in the table. "He-heel
Mistressl" cried he, sticking out his head, and when she was just going to grasp him, he jumped into the table-drawer. But in the end
she caught him, and drove him out of the house.
So he wandered on until he came to a great wood; and there he
met a gang of robbers that were going to rob the King's treasury.
When they saw the little tailor, they thought to themselves, "Such a little fellow might easily creep through a key-hole, and serve instead
of a pick-lock." "Holloal" cried one, "you giant Goliath, will you come with us to the treasure-chamber? You can slip in, and then
throw us out the money." Tom Thumb considered a little, but at last he consented and
went with them to the treasure-chamber. Then he looked all over
the door above and below, but there was no crack to be seen; at
last he found one broad enough to let him pass, and he was getting through, when one of the sentinels that stood before the door
saw him, and said to the other, "See what an ugly spider is crawling therel I will put an end to him." 'Xet the poor creatm-e alone,"
said the other, "it has done you no harm."
So Tom Thirnib got safely through the crack into the treasurechamber, and he opened the window beneath which the thieves
26 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
were standing, and he threw them out one dollar after another. Just
as he had well settled to the work, he heard the King coming to
take a look at his treasure, and so Tom Thumb had to creep away.
The King presently remarked that many good dollars were wanting, but could not imagine how they could have been stolen, as the
locks and bolts were in good order, and everything seemed secure.
And he went away, saying to the two sentinels, "Keep good guard;
there is some one after the money." When Tom Thumb had set to work anew, they heard the chink,
chink of the money, and hastily rushed in to catch the thief. But the
little tailor, as he heard them coming, was too quick for them, and,
hiding in a comer, he covered himself up with a doUar, so that
nothing of him was to be seen, and then he mocked the sentinels,
crying, "Here I am!" They ran about, and when they came near him,
he was soon in another comer under a doUar, crying, "Here I ami" Then the sentinels ran towards him, and in a moment he was in a
third comer, crying, "Here I ami" In this way he made fools of them, and dodged them so long about the treasure-chamber, that
they got tired and went away. Then he set to work, and threw the
dollars out of the window, one after the other, till they were all
gone; and when it came to the last, as he flung it with aU his might,
he jumped nimbly on it, and flew with it out of the window.
The robbers gave him great praise, saying, "You are a most valiant hero; will you be oiu: captain?" But Tom Thumb thanked them, and said he would like to see the
world first. Then they divided the spoil; but the Httle tailor's share was only one feirthing, which was all he was able to cairy.
Then binding his sword to his side, he bid the robbers good day,
and started on his way. He applied to several master tailors, but
they would not have anything to do with him; and at last he hired
himself as indoor servant at an inn. The maid-servants took a great
dislike to him, for he used to see everything they did without being
seen by them, and he told the master and mistress about what they
took from the plates, and what they carried away out of the cellar.
And they said, "Wait a little, we will pay you out," and took coun- sel together to play him some mischievous trick.
Once when one of the maids was mowing the grass in the garden
she saw Tom Thumb jimiping about and creeping among the cabbages, and she* mowed him with the grass, tied all together in a
bundle, and threw it to the cows. Among the cows was a big black
one, who swallowed him down, without doing him any harm. But
Tom Thumb's Travels 27
he did not like his lodging, it was so dark, and there was no candle
to be had. When the cow was being milked, he cried out,
"Strip, strap, strull.
Will the pail soon be fullF'
But he was not understood because of the noise of the milk.
Presently the landlord came into the stable and said, "Tomorrow
this cow is to be slaughtered." At that Tom Thumb felt very terrified; and with his shrillest
voice he cried, "Let me out first; I am sitting inside here!" The master heard him quite plainly, but could not tell where the
voice came from. "Where are you?" asked he. "Inside the black
one," answered Tom Thumb, but the master, not understanding the meaning of it all, went away.
The next morning the cow was slaughtered. Happily, in all the
cutting and slashing he escaped all harm, and he slipped among the
sausage-meat. When the butcher came near to set to work, he cried
with all his might, "Don't cut so deep, don't cut so deep, I am un- derneath I" But for the sound of the butcher's knife his voice was not heard.
Now, poor Tom Thumb was in great straits, and he had to jump
nimbly out of the way of the knife, and finally he came through
With a whole sldn. But he could not get quite away, and he had to
let himself remain with the lumps of fat to be put in a black pudding. His quarters were rather narrow, and he had to be hung up in
the chimney in the smoke, and to remain there a very long while.
At last, when winter came, he was taken down, for the black pudding was to be set before a guest. And when the landlady cut the
black pudding in slices, he had to great care not to lift up his head
too much, or it might be shaved off at the neck. At last he saw his
opportimity, took courage, and jumped out.
But as things had gone so badly with him in that house, Tom
Thumb did not mean to stay there, but betook himself again to his
wanderings. His freedom, however, did not last long. In the open
fields there came a fox who snapped him up without thinking.
"Oh, Mr. Fox," cried Tom Thumb, "here I am sticking in your
throat; let me out again." "Very well," answered the fox. "It is true you are no better than nothing; promise me the hens in your father's yard, then I will let you go." "With all my heart," answered
Tom Thumb, "you shall have them all, I promise you." Then the fox let him go, and he ran home. When the father saw
28 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
his dear little son again, he gave the fox willingly all the hens that he had.
"And look, besides, what a fine piece of money I've got for youl" said Tom Thumb, and handed over the farthing which he had
earned in his wanderings.
But how, you ask, could they let the fox devour aU the poor
chicks? Why, you silly child, you know that yoiu: father would rather
have you than the hens in his yardi
The Young Giant
A LONG TIME ago a countryman had a son who was as big as a
thumb, and did not become any bigger, and during several years
did not grow one hair's breadth. Once when the father was going
out to plough, the httle one said, "Father, I will go out with thee."
"Thou wouldst go out with me?" said the father. "Stay here, thou
wilt be of no use out there, besides thou mightst get lostl" Then ThmnbUng began to cry, and for the sake of peace his father put
him in his pocket, and took him with him.
When he was outside in the field, he took him out again, and set
him in a freshly-cut furrow.
While he was there, a great giant came over the hill. "Dost thou
see that great monster?" said the father, for he wanted to frighten
the Httle fellow to make him good. "He is coming to fetch thee." The giant, however, had scarcely taken two steps with his long legs
before he was in the furrow. He took up little Thumbling carefully
with two fingers, examined him, and without saying one word went
away with him. His father stood by, but could not utter a sound for
terror, and he thought nothing else but that his child was lost, and
that as long as he lived he should never set eyes on him again.
The giant, however, carried him home, suckled him, and Thumbling grew and became taU and strong after the manner of giants.
When two years had passed, the old giant took him into the forest,
wanted to try him, and said, "Pull up a stick for thyself." Then the boy was already so strong that he tore up a young tree out of the
earth by the roots. But the giant thought, "We must do better than
that," took him back again, and suckled him two years longer. When he tried him, his strength had increased so much that he
The Young Giant 29
could tear an old tree out of the ground. That was still not enough
for the giant; he again suckled him for two years, and when he then
went with him into the forest and said, "Now, just tear up a proper
stick for me," the boy tore up the strongest oak tree from the earth,
so that it spHt, and that was a mere trifle to him. "Now that will
do," said the giant, "thou art perfect," and took him back to the field from whence he had brought him. His father was there following the plough. The young giant went up to him, and said, "Does
my father see what a fine man his son has grown into?"
The farmer was alarmed, and said, "No, thou art not my son; I
don't want thee— leave mel" "Truly I am your son; allow me to do
your work, I can plough as well as you, nay better." "No, no, thou
art not my son, and thou canst not plough— go awayl" However, as he was afraid of this great man, he left hold of the plough, stepped
back and stood at one side of the piece of land. Then the youth
took the plough, and just pressed it with one hand, but his grasp
was so strong that the plough went deep into the earth. The farmer
could not bear to see that, and called to him, "If thou art deter- mined to plough, thou must not press so hard on it, that makes bad
work." The youth, however, unharnessed the horses, and drew the
plough himself, saying, "Just go home, father, and bid my mother make ready a large dish of food, and in the meantime I will go over
the field." Then the farmer went home, and ordered his wife to prepare the food; but the youth ploughed the field, which was two
acres large, quite alone, and then he harnessed himself to the har- row, and harrowed the whole of the land, using two harrows at
once. When he had done it, he went into the forest, and pulled up
two oak trees, laid them across his shoulders, and hung one harrow
on them behind and one before, and also one horse behind and one
before, and carried all as if it had been a bundle of straw, to his
parents' house. When he entered the yard, his mother did not recognize him, and
asked, "Who is that horrible tall man?" The farmer said, "That is
our son." She said, "No, that caimot be our son, we never had such
a tall one, ours was a little thing." She called to him, "Go away, we
do not want thee!" The youth was silent, but led his horses to the stable, gave them oats and hay, and all that they wanted. When he
had done this, he went into the parlor, sat down on the bench and
said, "Mother, now I should like something to eat, will it soon be
ready?" Then she said, "Yes," and brought in two immense dishes full of food, which would have been enough to satisfy herself and
her husband for a week. The youth, however, ate the whole of it
30 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
himself, and asked if she had nothing more to set before him. "No,"
she replied, "that is all we have." "But that was only a taste, I must
have more." She did not dare to oppose him, and went and put a huge caldron full of food on the fire, and when it was ready, carried it in.
"At length come a few crumbs," said he, and ate all there was, but
it was still not suflBcient to appease his hunger. Then said he, "Fa- ther, I see well that with thee I shall never have food enough; if
thou will get me an iron staff which is strong, and which I cannot
break against my knees, I will go out into the world." The farmer was glad, put his two horses in his cart, and fetched
from the smith a staff so large and thick that the two horses could
only just bring it away. The youth laid it across his knees, and snap!
he broke it in two in the middle like a beanstick, and threw it away.
The father then harnessed four horses, and brought a bar which
was so long and thick, that the four horses could only just drag it.
The son snapped this also in twain against his knees, threw it away,
and said, "Father, this can be of no use to me, thou must harness
more horses, and bring a stronger staff." So the father harnessed eight horses, and brought one which was so long and thick, that the
eight horses could only just carry it. When the son took it in his
hand, he broke a bit from the top of it also, and said, 'Tather, I see that thou wilt not be able to procure me any such staff as I want, I
will remain no longer with thee."
So he went away, and gave out that he was a smith's apprentice. He arrived at a village, wherein Hved a smith who was a greedy
fellow, who never did a kindness to any one, but wanted everything
for himself. The youth went into the smithy to him, and asked if he
needed a journeyman. "Yes," said the smith, and looked at him, and
thought, "That is a strong fellow who will strike out well, and earn
his bread." So he asked, "How much wages dost thou want" "1
don't want any at all," he replied, "only every fortnight, when the other journeymen are paid, I will give thee two blows, and thou
must bear them." The miser was heartily satisfied, and thought he would thus save much money.
Next morning, the strange journeyman was to begin to work, but
when the master brought the glowing bar, and the youth struck his
first blow, the iron flew asunder, and the anvil sank so deep into the
earth, that there was no bringing it out again. Then the miser grew
angry, and said, "Oh, but I can't make any use of thee, thou strikest
far too powerfully; what wilt thou have for the one blow?"
Then said he, "1 will only give thee quite a small blow, that's
The Young Giant 31
all." And he raised his foot, and gave him such a kick that he flew away over four loads of hay. Then he sought out the thickest iron
bar in the smithy for himself, took it as a stick in his hand, and went onwards.
When he had walked for some time, he came to a small farm,
and asked the bailiff if he did not require a head-servant. "Yes,"
said the bailiff, "I can make use of one; you look a strong fellow
who can do something, how much a year do you want as wages?" He again replied that he wanted no wages at all, but that every
year he would give him three blows, which he must bear. Then the
bailiff was satisfied, for he, too, was a covetous fellow. Next morning all the servants were to go into the wood, and the others were
already up, but the head-servant was still in bed. Then one of them
called to him, "Get up, it is time; we are going into the wood, and
thou must go vvdth us."
"Ah," said he quite roughly and surlily, "you may just go, then; I
shall be back again before any of you." Then the others went to the bailiff, and told him that the headman was still lying in bed, and would not go into the wood with
them. The bailiff said they were to awake him again, and tell him
to harness the horses. The head-man, however, said as before, "Just
go there, I shall be back again before any of you." And then he stayed in bed two hours longer. At length he arose from the
feathers, but first he got himself two bushels of peas from the loft,
made himself some broth with them, ate it at his leisure, and when
that was done, went and harnessed the horses, and drove into the wood.
Not far from the wood was fe ravine through which he had to
pass, so he first drove the horses on, and then stopped them, and
went behind the cart, took trees and brushwood, and made a great
barricade, so that no horse could get through. When he was entering the wood, the others were just driving out of it with their
loaded carts to go home; then said he to ihem, "Drive on, I wi]l still
get home before you do." He did not drive far into the wood, but at once tore two of the very largest trees of all out of the earth, threw
them on his cart, and tirnied round. When he came to the barricade, the others were still standing there, not able to get through.
"Don't you see," said he, "that if you had stayed with me, you would have got home just as quickly, and would have had another
hour's sleep?" He now wanted to drive on, but his horses could not work their
way through, so he unharnessed them, laid them at the top of the
32 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
cart, took tlie shafts in his own hands, and drew it over, and he did
this just as easily as if it had been laden with feathers. When he
was over, he said to the others, "There, you see, I have got over
quicker than you," and drove on, and the others had to stay where they were. In the yard, however, he took a tree in his hand, showed
it to the bailiff, and said, "Isn't that a fine bundle of wood?" Then
said the bailiff to his wife, "The servant is a good one, if he does
sleep long, he is stiU home before the others." So he served the bailiff a year, and when that was over, and the
other servants were getting their wages, he said it was time for him
to have his too. The bailiff, however, was afraid of the blows which
he was to receive, and earnestly entreated him to excuse him from
having them; for rather than that, he himself would be head-servant, and the youth should be bailiff. "No," said he, "I will not be a bailiff, I am head-servant, and will remain so, but I will administer
that which we agreed on." The bailiff was willing to give him what- soever he demanded, but it was of no use, the head-servant said no
to everything.
Then the bailiff did not know what to do, and begged for a fortnight's delay, for he wanted to find some way to escape. The head- servant consented to this delay. The baihff summoned all his clerks
together, and they were to think the matter over, and give him ad- vice. The clerks pondered for a long time, but at last they said that
no one was sure of his life with the head-servant, for he could kill a
man as easily as a midge, and that the bailiff ought to make him get
into the well and clean it, and when he was down below, they
would roll up one of the mill-stones which was lying there, and throw it on his head; and then he would never return to daylight.
The advice pleased the bailiff, and the head-servant was quite
willing to go down the well. When he was standing down below at
the bottom, they rolled down the largest miU-stone and thought
they had broken his skull, but he cried, "Chase away those hens from the well, they are scratching in the sand up there, and throwing the grains into my eyes, so that I can't see." So the bailiff cried,
"Sh-sh"— and pretended to frighten the hens away. When the head-servant had finished his work, he climbed up and
said, "Just look what a beautiful necktie I have on," and behold it was the miU-stone which he was wearing round his neck. The headservant now wanted to take his reward, but the bailiff again begged
for a fortnight's delay. The clerks met together and advised him to send the head-servant to the haimted mill to grind corn by night,
for from thence as yet no man had ever returned in the morning
The Young Giant 33
alive. The proposal pleased the bailiflF, he called the head-servant
that very evening, and ordered him to take eight bushels of com to
the mill, and grind it that night, for it w^as wanted.
So the head-servant went to the loft, and put two bushels in his
right pocket, and two in his left, and took foiu: in a wallet, half on
his back, and half on his breast, and thus laden went to the haunted
mill. The miller told him that he could grind there very well by
day, but not by night, for the mill was haunted, and that up to the
present time whosoever had gone into it at night had been found in
the morning, lying dead inside. He said, "1 wiU manage it, just you
go away to bed." Then he went into the mill, and poured out the corn.
About eleven o'clock he went into the miller's room, and sat down on the bench. When he had sat there a while, a door suddenly opened, and a large table came in, and on the table, wine
and roasted meats placed themselves, and much good food besides,
but everything came of itself, for no one was there to carry it. After
this the chairs pushed themselves up, but no people came, until all
at once he beheld fingers, which handled knives and forks, and laid
food on the plates, but with this exception he saw nothing. As he
was hungry, and saw the food, he, too, placed himself at the table,
ate with those who were eating, and enjoyed it.
When he had had enough, and the others also had quite emptied
their dishes, he distinctly heard all the candles being suddenly
snuffed out, and as it was now pitch dark, he felt something like a
box on the ear. Then he said, 'If anything of that Idnd comes
again, I shall strike out in return." And when he had received a sec- ond box on the ear, he, too, struck out. And so it continued the
whole night, he took nothing wdthout returning it, but repaid every- thing v^ath interest, and did not lay about him in vain.
At daybreak, however, everything ceased. When the miller had
got up, he wanted to look after him, and wondered if he were
still aUve. Then the youth said, "I have eaten my fill, have received
some boxes on the ear, but I have given some in return." The miller rejoiced, and said that the mill was now released from the spell,
and wanted to give him much money as a reward. But he said,
"Money, I will not have, I have enough of it." So he took his meal on his back, went home, and told the bailiff that he had done what
he had been told to do, and would now have the reward agreed on.
When the bailiff heard that, he was seriously alarmed and quite
beside himself; he walked backwards and forwards in the room,
and drops of perspiration ran down from his forehead. Then he
34 GHmm's Complete Fairy Tales
opened the window to get some fresh air, but before he was aware
the head-servant had given him such a kick that he flew through
the window out into the air, and so far away that no one ever saw
him again. Then said the head-servant to the bailiffs wife, "If he
does not come back, thou must take the other blow." She cried,
"No, no, I cannot bear it," and opened the other window, because drops of perspiration were running down her forehead. Then he
gave her such a kick that she, too, flew out, and as she was lighter
she went much higher than her husband. Her husband cried, "Do
come to me," but she rephed, "Come thou to me, I cannot come to
thee." They hovered about there in the air, and could not get to each
other, and whether they are still hovering about or not, I do not
know, but the young giant took up his iron bar, and went on his
way.
Sweet Porridge
There was a poor but good little girl who lived alone with her
mother, and they no longer had anything to eat. So the child went
into the forest, and there an aged woman met her who was aware
of her sorrow, and presented her with a little pot, which when she
said, "Cook, little pot, cook," would cook good, sweet porridge; and
when she said, "Stop, little pot," it ceased to cook. The girl took the pot home to her mother, and now they were freed from their poverty and hunger, and ate sweet porridge as often as they chose.
Once on a time when the girl had gone out, her mother said,
"Cook, little pot, cook." And it did cook and she ate till she was satisfied, and then she wanted the pot to stop cooking, but did not
know the word. So it went on cooking and the porridge rose over
the edge, and still it cooked on until the kitchen and whole house
were full, and then the next house, and then the whole street, just
as if it wanted to satisfy the hunger of the whole world; and there
was the greatest distress, but no one knew how to stop it.
At last when only one single house remained, the child came
home and just said, "Stop, little pot," and it stopped and gave up cooking, and whosoever vidshed to return to the town had to eat his
way back.
The Elves
1
There was once a shoemaker, who, through no fault of his own, became so poor that at last he had nothing left but just enough
leather to make one pair of shoes. He cut out the shoes at night, so
as to set to work upon them next morning; and as he had a good
conscience, he laid himself quietly down in his bed, committed
himself to heaven, and fell asleep.
In the morning, after he had said his prayers, and was going to
get to work, he fotmd the pair of shoes made and finished, and
standing on his table. He was very much astonished, and could not
tell what to think, and he took the shoes in his hand to examine
them more closely; and they were so well made that every stitch
was in its right place, just as if they had come from the hand of a
master- workman.
Soon after, a purchaser entered, and as the shoes fitted him very
well, he gave more than the usual price for them, so that the shoemaker had enough money to buy leather for two more pairs of
shoes. He cut them out at night, and intended to set to work the
next morning with fresh spirit; but that was not to be, for when he
got up they were already finished, and even a customer was not
lacking, who gave him so much money that he was able to buy
leather enough for four new pairs. Early next morning he found the
four pairs also finished, and so it always happened; whatever he cut
out in the evening was worked up by the morning, so that he was
soon in the way of making a good living, and in the end became
very well-to-do.
One night, not long before Christmas, when the shoemaker had
finished cutting out, and before he went to bed, he said to his wife,
"How would it be if we were to sit up tonight and see who it is that does us this service?" His wife agreed, and set a light to bum. Then they both hid in a
comer of the room behind some coats that were hanging up, and
then they began to watch. As soon as it was midnight they saw
come in two neatly-formed naked little men, who seated themselves
36 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
before the shoemaker's table, and took up the work that was al- ready prepared, and began to stitch, to pierce, and to hammer so
cleverly and quickly with their Httle fingers that the shoemaker's eyes could scarcely follow them, so full of wonder was he. And they
never left oflE until everything was finished and was standing ready
on the table, and then they jumped up and ran off.
The next morning the shoemaker's wife said to her husband,
"Those little men have made us rich, and we ought to show our- selves grateful. With all their running about, and having nothing to
cover them, they must be very cold. I'U tell you what; I will make little shirts, coats, waistcoats, and breeches for them, and knit each
of them a pair of stockings, and you shall make each of them a pair
of shoes." The husband consented willingly, and at night, when everything
was finished, they laid the gifts together on the table, instead of the
cut-out work, and placed themselves so that they could observe
how the Httle men would behave. When midnight came, they
rushed in, ready to set to work, but when they found, instead of the
pieces of prepared leather, the neat little garments put ready for
them, they stood a moment in surprise, and then they showed the
greatest delight. With the greatest swiftness they took up the pretty
garments and sHpped them on, singing,
"What spruce and dandy boys are wel No longer cobblers we will beT
Then they hopped and danced about, jumping over the chairs
and tables, and at last they danced out at the door.
From that time they were never seen again; but it always went
well with the shoemaker as long as he Hved, and whatever he took
in hand prospered.
11
There was once a poor servant maid, who was very cleanly and
industrious; she swept down the house every day, and put the
sweepings on a great heap by the door. One morning, before she
began her work, she found a letter, and as she could not read, she
laid her broom in the comer, and took the letter to her master and
mistress, to see what it was about; and it was an invitation from the
elves, who wished the maid to come and stand godmother to one of
The Elves 37
their children. The maid did not know what to do; and as she was
told that no one ought to refuse the elves anything, she made up
her mind to go.
So there came three little elves, who conducted her into the middle of a high mountain, where the Httle people lived. Here everything was of a very small size, but more fine and elegant than can
be told. The mother of the child lay in a bed made of ebony, studded with pearls; the counterpane was embroidered with gold, the
cradle was of ivory, and the bathing-tub of gold. So the maid stood
godmother, and was then for going home, but the elves begged her
to stay at least three more days with them; and so she consented,
and spent the time in mirth and jollity, and the elves seemed very
fond of her. At last, when she was ready to go away, they filled her
pockets full of gold, and led her back again out of the mountain.
When she got back to the house, she was going to begin working
again, and took her broom in her hand— it was still standing in the
comer where she had left it— and began to sweep. Then came up
some strangers and asked her who she was, and what she was
doing. And she foimd that instead of three days, she had been
seven years with the elves in the mountain, and that during that time her master and mistress had died.
Ill
The elves once took a child away from its mother, and left in its
place a changeling with a big head and staring eyes, who did nothing but eat and drink. The mother in her trouble went to her neighbors and asked their advice. The neighbors told her to take the
changeling into the kitchen and put it near the hearth, and then to
make up the fire, and boil water in two egg-shells; that would make
the changeling laugh, and if he laughed, it would be all over with
him. So the woman did as her neighbors advised. And when she set
the egg-shells of water on the fire, the changeling said,
"Though old I be As forest tree.
Cooking in an egg-shell never did I see!"
and began to laugh. And directly there came in a crowd of elves
bringing in the right child; and they laid it near the hearth, and
carried the changeling away with them.
Fair Katrinelje and Pif-Paf-Poltrie
Good-day, Father Hollenthe." "Many thanks, Pif-paf-poltrie.'* "May
I be allowed to have your daughter?" "Oh, yes, if Mother Mal- cho (Milch-cow), Brother High-and-Mighty, Sister Kasetraut, and
fair Katrinelje are willing, you can have her." "Where is Mother
Malcho, then?" "She is in the cow-house, milking the cow."
"Good-day, Mother Malcho." "Many thanks, Pif-paf-poltrie."
"May I be allowed to have your daughter?" "Oh, yes, if Father HoUenthe, Brother High-and-Mighty, Sister Kasetraut, and fair Katrinelje are willing, you can have her." "Where is Brother Highand-Mighty, then?" "He is in the room chopping some wood."
"Good-day, Brother High-and-Mighty." "Many thanks, Pif-pafpoltrie." "May I be allowed to have your sister?" "Oh, yes, if Fa- ther Hollenthe, Mother Malcho, Sister Kasetraut, and fair Katrinelje are willing, you can have her." "Where is Sister Kasetraut,
then?" "She is in the garden cutting cabbages."
"Good-day, Sister Kasetraut." "Many thanks, Pif-paf-poltrie."
"May I be allowed to have your sister?" "Oh, yes, if Father Hol- lenthe, Mother Malcho, Brother High-and-Mighty, and fair Katrinelje are willing, you may have her." "Where is fair Katrinelje,
then?" "She is in the room counting out her farthings."
"Good-day, fair Katrinelje." "Many thanks, Pif-paf-poltrie."
"Wilt thou be my bride?" "Oh, yes, if Father Hollenthe, Mother Malcho, Brother High-and-Mighty, and Sister Kasetraut are willing,
I am ready."
"Fair Katrinelje, how much dowry hast thou?" "Fourteen far- things in ready money, three and a half groschen owing to me, half
a pound of dried apples, a handful of fried bread, and a handful of
spices.
And many other things are mine.
Have I not a dowry fine?
Pif-paf-poltrie, what is thy trade? Art thou a tailor?" "Something
better." "A shoemaker?" "Something better." "A husbandman?"
"Something better." "A joiner?" "Something better." "A smith?"
"Something better." "A miller?" "Something better." "Perhaps a
broom-maker?" "Yes, that's what I am, is it not a fine trade?"
The Old Beggar- Woman
There was once an old woman, but thou hast surely seen an old
woman go a-begging before now? This woman begged likewise,
and when she got anything she said, "May God reward you." The beggar-woman came to a door, and there by the fire a friendly
rogue of a boy was standing warming himself. The boy said kindly
to the poor old woman as she was standing shivering thus by the
door, "Come, old mother, and warm yourself." She came in, but stood too near the fire, so that her old rags began to bum, and she
was not aware of it. The boy stood and saw that, but he ought to
have put the flames out. And if he could not find any water, then
should he have wept all the water in his body out of his eyes, and
that would have supplied two fine streams with which to extinguish them.
The Jew Among Thorns
There was once a rich man who had a servant who served him
diligently and honestly. Every morning the servant was the first out
of bed, and the last to go to rest at night; and, whenever there was
a difficult job to be done, which nobody cared to undertake, he was
always the first to set himself to it. Moreover, he never complained,
but was contented with everything, and always merry.
When a year was ended, his master gave him no wages, for he
said to himself, "That is the cleverest way; for I shall save something, and he will not go away, but stay quietly in my service." The servant said nothing, but did his work the second year as he had
done it the first; and when at the end of this, likewise, he received
no wages, he made himself happy, and still stayed on.
When the third year also was past, the master considered, put his
hand in his pocket, but pulled nothing out. Then at last the servant
said, "Master, for three years I have served you honestly; be so
40 Griinm*s Complete Fairy Tales
good as to give me what I ought to have, for I wish to leave, and
look about me a little more in the world."
''Yes, my good fellow," answered the old miser; "you have served
me industriously, and therefore you shall be cheerfully rewarded"; and he put his hand into his pocket, but counted out only three farthings, saying, "There, you have a farthing for each year; that is large and liberal pay, such as you would have received from few
masters." The honest servant, who understood little about money, put his
fortune into his pocket, and thought, "Ah! now that I have my purse full, why need I trouble and plague myself any longer with
hard work!" So on he went, up hill and down dale; and sang and
jumped to his heart's content. Now it came to pass that as he was going by a thicket a little man stepped out, and called to him,
''Whither away, merry brother? I see you do not carry many cares."
*Why should I be sad?" answered the servant; "I have enough;
three years' wages are jingling in my pocket."
"How much is your treasure?" the dwarf asked him. "How
much? Three farthings sterling, all told."
"Look here," said the dwarf, *T am a poor needy man, give me your three farthings; I can work no longer, but you are young,
and can easily earn your bread." And as the servant had a good heart, and felt pity for the old
man, he gave him the three farthings, saying, "Take them in the
name of Heaven, I shaU not be any the worse for it."
Then the little man said, "As I see you have a good heart I grant
you three wishes, one for each farthing, they shall all be fulfilled."
"Aha?" said the servant, "you are one of those who can work wonders! Well, then, if it is to be so, I wish, first, for a gun, which
shall hit everything that I aim at; secondly, for a fiddle, which
when I play on it, shall compel aU who hear it to dance; thirdly,
that if I ask a favor of any one he shall not be able to refuse it."
"All that shall you have," said the dwarf; and put his hand into the bush; and only think, there lay a fiddle and gun, all ready, just
as if they had been ordered. These he gave to the servant, and then
said to him, "Whatever you may ask at any time, no man in the world shaU be able to deny you." "Heart alive! What more can one desire?" said the servant to himself, and went merrily onwards. Soon afterwards he met a Jew
with a long goafs-beard, who was standing listening to the song of
a bird whidi was sitting up at the top of a tree. "Good heavens," he
was exclaiming, "that such a small creature should have subh a
The Jew Among Thorns 41
fearfully loud voice! If it were but mine! If only some one would
sprinkle some salt upon its tail!"
"If that is all," said the servant, "the bird shall soon be down
here"; and taking aim he pulled the trigger, and down fell the bird
into the thorn-bushes. "Go, you rogue," he said to the Jew, "and
fetch the bird out for yourself!"
"Oh!" said the Jew, "leave out the rogue, my master, and I will do it at once. I will get the bird out for myself, as you reaUy have
hit it." Then he lay down on the ground, and began to crawl into the thicket.
When he was fast among the thorns, the good servant's humor so tempted him that he took up his fiddle and began to play. In a moment the Jew's legs began to move, and to jump into the air, and the more the servant fiddled the better went the dance. But the
thorns tore his shabby coat for him, combed his beard, and pricked
and plucked him all over the body. "Oh dear," cried the Jew,
"what do I want with your fiddling? Leave the fiddle alone, master;
I do not want to dance."
But the servant did not listen to him, and thought, "You have fleeced people often enough, now the thom-bushes shall do the
same to you"; and he began to play over again, so that the Jew had to jmnp higher than ever, and scraps of his coat were left hanging
on the thorns. "Oh, woe's me!" cried the Jew; "I will give the gen- tleman whatsoever he asks i£ only he leaves off fiddling— a purse
full of gold." "If you are so liberal," said the servant, "I will stop my music; but this I must say to your credit, that you dance to it so
well that it is quite an art"; and having taken the purse he went his way.
The Jew stood stiU and watched the servant quietly until he was
far off and out of sight, and then he screamed out with all his
might, "You miserable musician, you beer-house fiddler! Wait till I catch you alone, I will hunt you till the soles of your shoes fall off!
You ragamuffin! Just put five farthings in yom* mouth, and then you
may be worth three halfpence!" and went on abusing him as fast as he could speak.
As soon as he had refreshed himself a little in this way, and got
his breath again, he ran into the town to the justice. "My lord
judge," he said, "I have come to make a complaint; see how a ras- cal has robbed and ill-treated me on the public highway! A stone
on the ground might pity me; my clothes aU torn, my body pricked
and scratched, my little aU gone with my pvurse— good ducats, each
42 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
piece better than the last; for God's sake let the man be thrown into
prisonl" "Was it a soldier," said the judge, "who cut you thus with his
sabre?" "Nothing of the sortl" said the Jew; "it was no sword that he had, but a gun hanging at his back, and a fiddle at his neck; the
wretch may easily be known." So the judge sent his people out after the man, and they found
the good servant, who had been going quite slowly along, and they
found, too, the purse with the money upon him. As soon as he was
taken before the judge he said, "I did not touch the Jew, nor take his money; he gave it to me of his own free wiU, that I might leave oflE
fiddling because he could not bear my music." "Heaven defend us!"
cried the Jew, "his lies are as thick as flies upon the wall."
But the judge also did not believe his tale, and said, "This is a
bad defense, no Jew would do that." And because he had commit- ted robbery on the public highway, he sentenced the good servant
to be hanged. As he was being led away the Jew again screamed
after him, "You vagabond! You dog of a fiddler! now you are going
to receive your well-earned reward!" The servant walked quietly with the hangman up the ladder, but
upon the last step he turned round and said to the judge, "Grant
me just one request before I die." "Yes, if you do not ask your life,"
said the judge. "I do not ask for life," answered the servant, "but as
a last favor let me play once more upon my fiddle."
The Jew raised a great cry of "Murder! murder! for goodness'
sake do not allow it! Do not allow it!" But the judge said, "Why should I not let him have this short pleasure? It has been granted to
him, and he shall have it." However, he could not have refused on account of the gift which had been bestowed on the servant.
Then the Jew cried, "Oh! woe's me! tie me, tie me fast!" while the good servant took his fiddle from his neck, and made ready. As
he gave the first scrape, they all began to quiver and shake, the
judge, his clerk, and the hangman and his men, and the cord fell
out of the hand of the one who was going to tie the Jew fast. At the
second scrape all raised their legs, and the hangman let go his hold
of the good servant, and made himself ready to dance. At the third
scrape they all leaped up and began to dance; the judge and the
Jew being the best at jumping. Soon all who had gathered in the
market-place out of curiosity were dancing with them; old and
young, fat and lean, one with another. The dogs, likewise, which
had run there got up on their hind legs and capered about; and the
King Thrushheard 43
longer he played, the higher sprang the dancers, so that they
knocked against each other's heads, and began to shriek terribly.
At length the judge cried, quite out of breath, "I will give you
your life if you will only stop fiddling." The good servant thereupon had compassion, took his fiddle and hung it round his neck again,
and stepped down the ladder. Then he went up to the Jew, who
was lying upon the ground panting for breath, and said, "You ras- cal, now confess, whence you got the money, or I wiU take my
fiddle and begin to play again." "I stole it, I stole itl" cried he; "Tsut
you have honestly earned it." So the judge had the Jew taken to the gallows and hanged as a thief.
King Thrushbeard
A KING had a daughter who was beautiful beyond measure, but so
proud and overbearing that none of her suitors were good enough
for her; she not only refused one after the other, but made a laughing-stock of them.
Once the King appointed a great feast, and bade all the marriageable men to it from far and near. And tiiey were all put in
rows, according to their rank and station: first came the Kings,
then the Princes, the dukes, the earls, the barons, and lastly the
noblemen. The Princess was led in front of the rows, but she had a
mocking epithet for each. One was too fat, "What a tubl" said she;
another too tall, "Long and lean is ill to be seen," said she; a third
too short, 'Tat and short, not fit to court," said she. A fourth was
too pale— "A regular death's-head"; a fifth too red-faced— "A gamecock," she called him. The sixth was not well-made enough—
"Green wood ill driedl" cried she. So every one had something against him, and she made especially merry over a good King who
was very tall, and whose chin had grown a little peaked. "Only
look," cried she, laughing, "he has a chin like a thrush's beak." And from that time they called him King Thrushbeard. But the
old King, when he saw that his daughter mocked every one, and
scorned all the assembled suitors, swore in his anger that she
should have the first beggar that came to the door for a husband.
A few days afterwards came a traveling ballad-singer, and sang under the window in hopes of a small alms. When the King heard
44 Grimms Complete Fairy Tales
of it, he said that he must come in. And so the ballad-singer entered
in his dirty tattered garments, and sang before the King and his
daughter; when he had done, he asked for a small reward. But the
King said, "Your song has so well pleased me, that I will give you
my daughter to wife."
The Princess was horrified; but the King said, "I took an oath to
give you to the first beggar that came, and so it must be done." There was no remedy. The priest was fetched, and she had to be
married to the ballad-finger out of hand. When all was done, the
King said, "Now, as you are a beggar-wife, you can stay no longer
in my castle, so off with you and your husband." The beggar-man led her away, and she was obliged to go forth
with him on foot. On the way they came to a great wood, and she asked,
"Oh, whose is this forest, so thick and so fineF*
He answered,
"It is King Thrushheards, and might have been thine" And she cried,
"Oh, I was a silly young thing, Tm af eared.
Would I had taken that good King Thrushbeard!"
Then they passed through a meadow, and she asked,
"Oh, whose is this meadow, so green and so fine?"
He answered,
"It is King Thrushheards, and might have been thine."
And she cried,
"I was a silly young thing, Tm af eared.
Would I had taken that good King ThrushbeardF'
Then they passed through a great town, and she asked,
"Whose is this city, so great and so fine?"
He answered,
"Oh, it is King Thrushbeard' s, and might have been thine."
And she cried,
"I was a silly young thing, Tm af eared.
Would I had taken that good King Thrushbeard!"
King Thrushbeard 45
Then said the beggar-man, "It does not please me to hear you always wishing for another husband; am I not good enough for you?" At last they came to a very smaU house, and she said,
"Oh dear me! what poor little house do I see?
And whose, I would know, may the wretched hole beF'
The man answered, 'That is my house and yours, where we must
live together." She had to stoop before she could go in at the door.
"Where are the servants?" asked the King's daughter.
"What servants?" answered the beggar-man, "what you want to have done you must do yoiurself. Make a fire quickly, and put on
water, and cook me some food; I am very tired."
But the King's daughter understood nothing about fire-maldng and cooking, and the beggar-man had to lend a hand himself in
order to manage it at all. And when they had eaten their poor fare,
they went to bed; but the man called up his wiie very early in the
morning, in order to clean the house.
For a few days they lived in this indifferent manner, until they
came to the end of their store. "Wife," said the man, "this will not
do, stopping here and earning nothing; you must make baskets." So he went out and cut wiUows, and brought them home; and
she began to weave them, but the hard twigs wounded her tender
hands. "I see this wiU not do," said the man, "you had better try
spinning." So she sat her down and tried to spin, but the harsh thread cut
her soft fingers, so that the blood flowed. "Look nowl" said the
man, "you are no good at any sort of work; I made a bad bargain when I took you. I must see what I can do to make a trade of pots
and earthen vessels; you can sit in the market and offer them for
sale."
"Oh dearl" thought she, "suppose while I am selling in the market people belonging to my father's kingdom should see me, how
they would mock at me!" But there was no help for it; she had to submit, or else die of hunger.
The first day all went well; the people bought her wares eagerly,
because she was so beautiful, and gave her whatever she asked,
and some of them gave her the money and left the pots after all
behind them. And they lived on these earnings as long as they
lasted; and then the man bought a nimiber of new pots. So she
seated herself in a comer of the market, and stood the wares before
her for sale. All at once a drunken horse-soldier came plimging by.
46 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
and rode straight into the midst of her pots, breaking them into a
thousand pieces. She could do nothing for weeping. "Oh dear,
what will become of me," cried she; "what will my husband say?" and she hastened home and told him her misfortune.
"Who ever heard of such a thing as sitting in the comer of the
market with earthenware potsl" said the man; "now leave oflF cry- ing; I see you are not fit for any regular work. I have been asking at
your father's castle if they want a kitchen-maid, and they say they
don't mind taking you; at any rate you will get your victuals free."
And the ICing's daughter became a kitchen-maid, to be at the
cook's beck and call, and to do the hardest work. In each of her pockets she fastened a little pot, and brought home in them whatever was left, and upon that she and her husband were fed. It happened one day, when the wedding of the eldest Prince was cele- brated, the poor woman went upstairs, and stood by the parlor door
to see what was going on. And when the place was Ughted up, and
the company arrived, each person handsomer than the one before,
and all was brilliancy and splendor, she thought on her own fate
wdth a sad heart, and bewailed her former pride and haughtiness
which had brought her so low, and plunged her in so great poverty.
And as the rich and delicate dishes smeUing so good were carried
to and fro every now and then, the servants would throw her a few
fragments, which she put in her pockets, intending to take home.
And then the Prince himself passed in, clothed in siUc and velvet,
with a gold chain round his neck. And when he saw the beautiful
woman standing in the doorway, he seized her hand and urged her
to dance with him, but she refused, all trembhng, for she saw it was
King Thrushbeard, who had come to court her, whom she had
turned away wdth mocking. It was of no use her resisting, he drew
her into the room; and all at once the band to which her pockets
were fastened broke, and the pots fell out, and the soup ran about,
and the fragments were scattered all round. And when the people
saw that, there was great laughter and mocking, and she felt so
ashamed, that she wished herself a thousand fathoms underground.
She rushed to the door to fly from the place, when a man caught
her just on the steps, and when she looked at him, it was King
Thrushbeard again. He said to her in a Idnd tone, "Do not be afraid, I and the beggar-man v^dth whom you lived in the wretched
Httle hut are one. For love of you I disguised myself, and it was I
who broke your pots in the guise of a horse-soldier. I did all that to
bring down your proud heart, and to punish your haughtiness,
which caused you to mock at me."
Clever Gretel 47
Then she wept bitterly, and said, "I have done great wrong, and
am not worthy to be your wife."
But he said, "Take courage, the evil days are gone over; now let
us keep our wedding-day." Then came the ladies-in-waiting and put on her splendid clothing; and her father came, and the whole coiut, and wished her joy
on her marriage with King Thrushbeard; and then the merry-making began in good earnest. I cannot help wishing that you and I could have been there too.
Clever Gretel
There was once a cook called Gretel, who wore shoes with red
heels, and when she went out in them she gave herself great airs,
and thought herself very fine indeed. When she came home again,
she would take a drink of wine to refresh herself, and as that gave
her an appetite, she would take some of the best of whatever she
was cooking, until she had had enough— "for," said she, "a cook
must know how things taste."
It happened that one day her master came to her and said, "Gre- tel, I expect a guest this evening; you must make ready a pair of
fowls." "I will see to it," answered Gretel. So she killed the fowls, cleaned them, and plucked them, and put
them on the spit, and then, as evening drew near, placed them be- fore the fire to roast. And they began to be brown, and were nearly
done, but the guest had not come.
"li he does not make haste," cried Gretel to her master, "I must
take them away from the fire; it's a pity and a shame not to eat
them now, just when they are done to a turn." And the master said he would run himself and fetch the guest. As soon as he had turned
his back, Gretel took the fowls from before the fire.
"Standing so long before the fire," said she, "makes one hot and thirsty— and who knows when they will cornel In the meanwhile I
will go to the cellar and have a drink." So down she ran, took up a
mug, and saying, "Here's to mel" took a good draught. "One good
drink deserves another," she said "and it should not be cut short"; so she took another hearty draught. Then she went and put the
fowls down to the fire again, and, basting them with butter, she
48 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
turned the spit briskly round. And now they began to smell so good
that Gretel saying, "I must find out whether they really are all
right," hcked her fingers, and then cried, "Well, I never 1 the fowls
are good; it's a sin and a shame that no one is here to eat them I" So she ran to the window to see if her master and his guest were
coming, but as she could see nobody she went back to her fowls.
"Why, one of the wings is bumingl" she cried presently, "I had
better eat it and get it out of the way." So she cut it off and ate it
up, and it tasted good, and then she thought, "I had better cut off
the other too, in case the master should miss anything." And when both wings had been disposed of she went and looked for the
master, but still he did not come.
"Who knows," said she, "whether they are coming or not? they
may have put up at an inn." And after a pause she said again,
"Come, I may as well make myself happy, and first I will make sure of a good drink and then of a good meal, and when all is done
I shall be easy; the gifts of the gods are not to be despised." So first she ran down into the cellar and had a famous drink, and ate up
one of the fowls with great relish. And when that was done, and
still the master did not come, Gretel eyed the other fowl, saying,
"What one is the other must be, the two belong to each other, it is only fair that they should be both treated alike; perhaps when I
have had another drink, I shall be able to manage it." So she took another hearty drink, and then the second fowl went the way of the first.
Just as she was in the middle of it the master came back. "Make
haste, Gretel," cried he, "the guest is coming directlyl" "Very well,
master," she answered, "it vdll soon be ready." The master went to see that the table was properly laid, and, taking the great carving
knife with which he meant to carve the fowls, he sharpened it upon
the step. Presently came the guest, knocking very genteeUy and
softly at the front door. Gretel ran and looked to see who it was,
and when she caught sight of the guest she put her finger on her lip
saying, "Hushl make the best haste you can out of this, for if my master catches you, it wiU be bad for you; he asked you to come to
supper, but he really means to cut off your ears! Just listen how he
is sharpening his knifel" The guest, hearing the noise of the sharpening, made off as fast
as he could go. And Gretel ran screaming to her master. "A pretty
guest you have asked to the house!" cried she. "How so, Gretel?
what do you mean?" asked he. "What indeedl" said she; "why, he
Pitchers Bird 49
has gone and run away with my pair of fowk that I had just dished
up.
"That's pretty sort of conduct!" said the master, feeling very
sorry about the fowls; 'Tie might at least have left me one, that I
might have had something to eat." And he called out to him to stop, but the guest made as if he did not hear him; then he ran after him,
the knife still in his hand, crying out, "Only onel only onel" mean- ing that the guest should let him have one of the fowls and not take
both; but the guest thought he meant to have only one of his ears,
and he ran so much the faster that he might get home with both of them safe.
Pitcher's Bird
Theee was once a wizard who used to take the form of a poor man.
He went to houses and begged, and caught pretty girls. No one
knew whither he carried them, for they were never seen more. One
day he appeared before the door of a man who had three pretty
daughters. He looked like a poor weak beggar, and carried a basket
on his back, as if he meant to collect charitable gifts in it. He
begged for a httle food, and when the eldest daughter came out
and was just reaching him a piece of bread, he did but touch her,
and she was forced to jump into his basket. Thereupon he hurried
away with long strides, and carried her away into a dark forest to
his house, which stood in the midst of it.
Everything in the house was magnificent; he gave her whatsoever
she could possibly desire, and said, "My darHng, thou wilt certainly
be happy with me, for thou hast everything thy heart can wish for."
This lasted a few days, and then he said, "I must journey forth, and leave thee alone for a short time; there are the keys of the house;
thou mayst go everywhere and look at everything except into one
room, which this Uttle key here opens, and there I forbid thee to go
on pain of death." He Hkewise gave her an egg and said, "Preserve the egg carefully for me, and carry it continually about with thee,
for a great misfortune would arise from the loss of it." She took the keys and the egg, and promised to obey him in everything. When he was gone, she went all round the house from the
bottom to the top, and examined everything. The rooms shone with
50 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
silver and gold, and she thought she had never seen such great
splendor.
At length she came to the forbidden door; she wished to pass it
by, but curiosity let her have no rest. She examined the key, it
looked just Hke any other; she put it in the keyhole and tiumed it a
little, and the door sprang open. But what did she see when she
went in? A great bloody basin stood in the middle of the room, and
therein lay human beings, dead and hewn to pieces, and hard by
was a block of wood, and a gleaming axe lay upon it. She was so
terribly alarmed that the egg which she held in her hand fell into
the basin. She got it out and washed the blood off, but in vain, it appeared again in a moment. She washed and scrubbed, but she
could not get it out.
It was not long before the man came back from his journey, and
the first things which he asked for were the key and the egg. She
gave them to him, but she trembled as she did so, and he saw at
once by the red spots that she had been in the bloody chamber.
"Since thou hast gone into the room against my wiU," said he,
"thou shalt go back into it against thine own. Thy life is ended." He threw her down, dragged her thither by her hair, cut her head off
on the block, and hewed her in pieces so that her blood ran on the
ground. Then he threw her into the basin with the rest.
"Now I will fetch myself the second," said the wizard, and again he went to the house in the shape of a poor man, and begged. Then
the second daughter brought him a piece of bread; he caught her
like the first, by simply touching her, and carried her away. She did
not fare better than her sister. She allowed herself to be led away
by her curiosity, opened the door of the bloody chamber, looked in,
and had to atone for it with her life on the wizard's return. Then he went and brought the third sister. But she was clever and
crafty. When he had given her the keys and the egg, and had left
her, she first put the egg away with great care, and then she ex- amined the house, and at last went into the forbidden room. Alas,
what did she beholdl Both her sisters lay there in the basLn, cruelly
murdered, and cut in pieces. She began to gather their limbs together and put them in order, head, body, arms and legs. And when
nothing fiuther was lacking, the limbs began to move and unite
themselves together, and both the maidens opened their eyes and
were once more aUve. Then they rejoiced and kissed and caressed each other.
On his arrival, the man at once demanded the keys and the egg,
Fitchet^s Bird 51
and as he could perceive no trace of any blood on it, he said,
"Thou hast stood the test, thou shalt be my bride." He now had no longer any power over her, and was forced to do whatsoever she
desired. "Oh, very well," said she, "thou shalt first take a basketful of gold to my father and mother, and carry it thyself on thy back;
in the meantime I will prepare for the wedding." Then she ran to her sisters, whom she had hidden in a Mttle
chamber and said, "The moment has come when I can save you. The wretch shall himself carry you home again, but as soon as you
are at home send help to me." She put both of them in a basket and covered them quite over with gold, so that nothing of them was to
be seen, then she called in the wizard and said to him, "Now carry the basket away, but I shall look through my little window and
watch to see if thou stoppest on the way to stand or to rest." The wizard raised the basket on his back and went away with it,
but it weighed him down so heavily that the perspiration streamed
from his face. Then he sat down and wanted to rest awhile, but
immediately one of the girls in the basket cried, "I am looking through my little window, and I see that thou art resting. Wilt
thou go on at once?" He thought his bride was calling that to him; and got up on his legs again. Once more he was going to sit down,
but instantly she cried, "I am looking through my httle window,
and I see that thou art resting. Wilt thou go on directly?" Whenever he stood still, she cried this, and then he was forced to
go onwards, until at last, groaning and out of breath, he took the
basket with the gold and the two maidens into their parents' house. At home, however, the bride prepared the marriage-feast, and sent invitations to the friends of the wizard. Then she took a skull with
grinning teeth, put some ornaments on it and a wreath of flowers,
carried it upstairs to the garret-window, and let it look out from
thence. When all was ready, she got into a barrel of honey, and
then cut the feather-bed open and rolled herself in it, until she
looked like a wondrous bird, and no one could recognize her. Then
she went out of the house, and on her way she met some of the
wedding-guests, who asked,
"O, Fitcher's bird, how comst thou here?"
"I come from Fitcher's house quite near,"
"And what may the young bride be doing?"
"From cellar to garret she's swept all clean.
And now from the window she's peeping, I ween."
52 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
At last she met the bridegroom, who was coming slowly back. He,
like the others, asked,
"O, Fitche/s bird, how com'sf thou hereF'
"I come from Fitche/s house quite near."
"And what may the young bride be doing?"
"From cellar to garret she's swept all clean.
And now from the uAndow she's peeping, I ween^
The bridegroom looked up, saw the decked-out skuU, thought it
was his bride, and nodded to her, greeting her kindly. But when he
and his guests had all gone into the house, the brothers and kinsmen of the bride, who had been sent to rescue her, arrived. They
locked all the doors of the house, that no one might escape, set fire
to it, and the wizard and all his crew were burned.
The Robber Bridegroom
Thesie was once a miller who had a beautiful daughter, and when
she was grown up he became anxious that she should be weU married and taken care of; so he thought, "If a decent sort of man
comes and asks her in marriage, I wiU give her to him." Soon after a suitor came forward who seemed very well-to-do,
and as the miller knew nothing to his disadvantage, he promised
him his daughter. But the girl did not seem to love him as a bride
should love her bridegroom; she had no confidence in him; as often
as she saw him or thought about him, she felt a chiU at her heart.
One day he said to her, "You are to be my bride, and yet you
have never been to see me." The girl answered, "\ do not know
where your house is." Then he said, "My house is a long way in the
wood." She began to make excuses, and said she could not find the way
to it; but the bridegroom said, "You must come and pay me a visit next Sunday; I have already invited company, and I will strew
ashes on the path through the wood, so that you will be srnre to find
When it." Sunday came, and the girl set out on her way, she felt very
uneasy without knowing exactly why; and she filled both pockets
The Robber Bridegroom 53
full of peas and lentils. There were ashes strewn on the path
through the wood, but nevertheless, at each step she cast to the
right and left a few peas on the ground. So she went on the whole
day until she came to the middle of the wood, where it was darkest,
and there stood a lonely house, not pleasant in her eyes, for it was
dismal and unhomeUke. She walked in, but there was no one there,
and the greatest stillness reigned. Suddenly she heard a voice cry,
"Turn back, turn back, thou pretty bride. Within this house thou must not bide.
For here do evil things betide."
The girl glanced round, and perceived that the voice came from
a bird who was hanging in a cage by the wall. And again it cried,
"Turn back, turn back, thou pretty bride. Within this house thou must not bide.
For here do evil things betide"
Then the pretty bride went on from one room into another
through the whole house, but it was quite empty, and no soul to be
found in it. At last she reached the cellar, and there sat a very old
woman nodding her head.
"Can you teU me," said the bride, "if my bridegroom lives here?"
"Oh, poor child," answered the old woman, "do you know what has happened to you? You are in a place of cutthroats. You thought
you were a bride, and soon to be married, but death will be your
spouse. Look here, I have a great kettle of water to set on, and
when once they have you in their power they will cut you in pieces
without mercy, cook you, and eat you, for they are carmibals. Unless I have pity on you, and save you, all is over with youl" Then the old woman hid her behind a great cask, where she
could not be seen. "Be as still as a mouse," said she; "do not move or go away, or else you are lost. At night, when the robbers are
asleep, we will escape. I have been waiting a long time for an opportunity." No sooner was it settled than the wicked gang entered the house.
They brought another young woman with them, dragging her
along, and they were drunk, and would not listen to her cries and
groans. They gave her wine to drink, three glasses full, one of white
wine, one of red, and one of yellow, and then they cut her in
pieces; the poor bride all the while shaking and trembling when she saw what a fate the robbers had intended for her.
One of them noticed on the little finger of their victim a golden
54 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
ring, and as he could not draw it oflE easily, he took an axe and
chopped it oflE, but the finger jumped away, and feU behind the
cask on the bride's lap. The robber took up a Hght to look for it, but
he could not find it. Then said one of the others, "Have you looked
behind the great cask?" But the old woman cried, "Come to supper,
and leave off looking till tomorrow; the finger cannot run away." Then the robbers said the old woman was right, and they left off
searching, and sat down to eat, and the old woman dropped some
sleeping stuff into their wine, so that before long they stretched
themselves on the cellar floor, sleeping and snoring.
When the bride heard that, she came from behind the cask, and
had to make her way among the sleepers lying aU about on the
ground, and she felt very much afraid lest she might awaken any of
them. But by good luck she passed through, and the old woman
with her, and they opened the door, and they made haste to leave
that house of murderers. The wind had carried away the ashes from
the path, but the peas and lentils had budded and sprung up, and
the moonshine upon them showed the way. And they went on
through the night, till in the morning they reached the mill. Then
the girl related to her father aU that had happened to her.
When the wedding-day came, the friends and neighbors assembled, the miller having invited them, and the bridegroom also
appeared. When they were all seated at table, each one had to teU
a story. But the bride sat stiU, and said nothing, tiU at last the
bridegroom said to her, "Now, sweetheart, do you know no story?
TeU us something."
She answered, '1 wiU teU you my dream. I was going alone through a wood, and I came at last to a house in which there was
no living soul, but by the waU was a bird in a cage, who cried,
'Turn back, turn back, thou pretty bride. Within this house thou must not bide.
For here do evil things betide'
"And then again it said it. Sweetheart, the dream is not ended. Then I went through aU the rooms, and they were all empty, and it
was so lonely and wretched. At last I went down into the ceUar,
and there sat an old old woman, nodding her head. I asked her if
my bridegroom lived in that house, and she answered, 'Ah, poor child, you have come into a place of cutthroats; your bridegroom
does live here, but he wiU kiU you and cut you in pieces, and then
cook and eat you.' Sweetheart, the dream is not ended. But the old woman hid me behind a great cask, and no sooner had she done so
Old Hildebrand 55
than the robbers came home, dragging with them a young woman,
and they gave her to drink wine thrice, white, red, and yellow.
Sweetheart, the dream is not yet ended. And then they killed her,
and cut her in pieces. Sweetheart, my dream is not yet ended. And
one of the robbers saw a gold ring on the jBnger of the young
woman, and as it was diflBcult to get oflF, he took an axe and
chopped ofiE the finger, which jumped upwards, and then fell behind the great cask on my lap. And here is the finger with the ringl" At these words she drew it forth, and showed it to the company.
The robber, who during the story had grown deadly white,
sprang up, and would have escaped, but the folks held him fast,
and delivered him up to justice. And he and his whole gang were,
for their evil deeds, condemned and executed.
Old Hildebrand
Once upon a time lived a peasant and his wife, and the parson of
the village had a fancy for the wife, and had wished for a long
while to spend a whole day happily with her, and the peasant
woman, too, was quite willing. One day, therefore, he said to the
woman, "Listen, my dear friend, I have now thought of a way by
which we can for once spend a whole day happily together. I'll tell you what: on Wednesday, you must take to your bed, and tell your
husband you are ill, and if you only complain and act being ill
properly, and go on doing it imtil Simday when I have to preach, I
will then say in my sermon that whosoever has at home a sick child,
a sick husband, a sick wife, a sick father, a sick mother, a sick sister,
brother or whosoever else it may be, and makes a pilgrimage to the
Gockerli hill in Italy, where you can get a peck of laurel-leaves for
a kreuzer, the sick child, the sick husband, the sick wiie, the sick father, or sick mother, the sick sister, or whosoever else it may be,
will be restored to health immediately."
"1 will manage it," said the woman directly. Now therefore, on
the Wednesday, the peasant woman took to her bed, and complained and lamented as agreed on, and her husband did everything for her that he could think of, but nothing did her any good,
and when Sunday came the woman said, "l feel as iU as if I were
56 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
going to die at once, but there is one thing I should like to do before my end— I should like to hear the parson's sermon that he is
going to preach today." On that the peasant said, "Ah, my child, do not do it— you might make yourself worse if you were to get up.
Look, I will go to the sermon, and will attend to it very carefully,
and will tell you everything the parson says."
"Well," said the woman, "go, then, and pay great attention, and
repeat to me all that you hear." So the peasant went to the sermon, and the parson began to preach and said, if any one had at home a
sick child, a sick husband, a sick wife, a sick father, a sick mother, a
sick sister, brother or any one else, and would make a pilgrimage to
the Gockerli hill in Italy, where a peck of laiuel-leaves costs a
kreuzer, the sick child, sick husband, sick wife, sick father, sick
mother, sick sister, brother, or whosoever else it might be, would be
restored to health instantly; and whosoever wished to undertake
the journey was to go to him after the service was over, and he
would give him the sack for the laurel-leaves and the kreuzer.
No one was more rejoiced than the peasant, and after the service
was over, he went at once to the parson, who gave him the bag for
the laurel-leaves and the kreuzer. After that he went home, and
even at the house door he cried, "Hurrah! dear wife, it is now al- most the same thing as if you were well! The parson has preached
today that whosoever had at home a sick child, a sick husband, a
sick wife, a sick father, a sick mother, a sick sister, brother or whoever it might be, and would make a pilgrimage to the GockerH hiU
in Italy, where a peck of laurel-leaves costs a kreuzer, the sick
child, sick husband, sick wife, sick father, sick mother, sick sister,
brother, or whosoever else it was, would be cured immediately; and
now I have already got the bag and the kreuzer from the parson,
and will at once begin my journey so that you may get well the
faster," and thereupon he went away. He was, however, hardly gone before the women got up, and the parson was there directly.
But now we will leave these two for a while, and follow the peasant, who walked on quickly without stopping, in order to get the
sooner to the Gockerli hiU; and on his way he met his gossip. His
gossip was an egg-merchant, and was just coming from the market,
where he had sold his eggs. "May you be blessed," said the gossip,
"where are you off to so fast?"
"To all eternity, my friend," said the peasant, "my wife is iU, and
I have been today to hear the parson's sermon, and he preached that if any one had in his house a sick child, a sick husband, a sick
Old Hildebrand 57
wife, a sick father, a sick mother, a sick sister, brother or any one
else, and made a pilgrimage to the Gockerli hill in Italy, where a
peck of laurel-leaves costs a kreuzer; the sick child, the sick hus- band, the sick wife, the sick father, the sick mother, the sick sister,
brother, or whosoever else it was, would be cured immediately; and
so I have got the bag for the laurel-leaves and the kreuzer from the
parson, and now I am beginning my pilgrimage." "But listen, gossip," said the egg-merchant to the peasant, "are you, then, stupid
enough to believe such a thing as that? Don't you know what it means? The parson wants to spend a whole day alone with your
wife in peace, so he has given you this job to do to get you out of
the way."
"My word!" said the peasant. "How I'd like to know if that's
truel"
"Come, then," said the gossip, "I'll tell you what to do. Get into my egg-basket and I will carry you home, and then you will see for
yourself." So that was settled, and the gossip put the peasant into his egg-basket, and carried him home.
When they got to the house, hurrahl but all was going merrily
there I The woman had already had nearly everything killed that
was in the farmyard, and had made pancakes; and the parson was
there, and had brought his fiddle with him. The gossip knocked at
the door, and the woman asked who was there. "It is I, gossip,"
said the egg-merchant, "give me shelter this night; I have not sold my eggs at the market, so now I have to carry them home again,
and they are so heavy that I shall never be able to do it, for it is
dark already."
'Indeed, my friend," said the woman, "you come at a very inconvenient time for me, but as you are here it can't be helped; come in,
and take a seat there on the bench by the stove." Then she placed the gossip and the basket which he carried on his back on the
bench by the stove. The parson, however, and the woman were as
merry as possible. At length the parson said, "Listen, my dear
friend, you can sing beautifully; sing something to me." "Oh," said
the woman, "1 cannot sing now, in my young days indeed I could
sing well enough, but that's all over now." "Come," said the parson
once more, "do sing some little song." Then the woman sang,
"I've sent my husband atoay from me
To the Gockerli hill in Italy.'*
58 Grimms Complete Fairy Tales
Thereupon the parson sang,
"I wish 'twas a year before he came back, Td never ask him for the laurel-leaf sack.
Hallelujah." Then the gossip, who was in the background, began to sing (but
I ought to tell you the peasant was called Hildebrand), so the gos- sip sang,
"What art thou doing, my Hildebrand dear. There on the bench by the stove so near?
Hallelujah." Then the peasant sang from his basket,
"All singing I ever shall hate from this day,
And here in this basket no longer I'll stay.
Hallelujah." And he got out of the basket and drove the parson out of the house.
The Singing Bone
A CERTAIN COUNTRY was greatly troubled by a wild boar that at- tacked workers in the fields, killed men, and tore them to pieces
with its terrible tusks. The King of the country had offered rich rewards to any one who would rid the land of this terror. But the
beast was so huge and ferocious that no man could even be per- suaded to enter the forest where the animal made its home.
At last the King made a proclamation that he would give his only
daughter in marriage to any man who would bring the wild boar to
him, dead or alive.
There lived two brothers in that country, the sons of a poor man,
who gave notice of their readiness to enter on this perilous undertaking. The elder, who was clever and crafty, was influenced by
pride; the younger, who was innocent and simple, offered himself from kindness of heart.
Thereupon the King advised that, as the best and safest way
would be to take opposite directions in the wood, the elder was to
go in the evening and the younger in the morning.
The Singing Bone 59
The younger had not gone far when a little fairy stepped up to
him. He held in his hand a black spear, and said, "I will give you this spear because your heart is innocent and good. With this you
can go out and discover the v^ld boar, and he shall not be able to
harm you." He thanked the httle man, took the spear, placed it on his shoulder, and without delay went further into the forest. It was not long
before he espied the animal coming toward him, and fiercely making ready to spring. But the youth stood still and held the spear
firmly in front of him. In wild rage the fierce beast ran violently to- ward him, and was met by the spear, on the point of which he
threw himself, and, as it pierced his heart, he fell dead.
Then the youngster took the dead monster on his shoulder and
went to find his brother. As he approached the other side of the
wood, where stood a large hall, he heard music, and found a number of people dancing, drinking wine, and making merry. His elder
brother was among them, for he thought the wdld boar would not
run far away, and he wished to get up his courage for the evening
by cheerful company and wdne.
When he caught sight of his younger brother coming out of the
forest laden wdth his booty, the most restless jealousy and mahce
rose in his heart. But he disguised his bitter feehngs and spoke
kindly to his brother, and said, "Come in and stay v^dth us, dear brother, and rest awhile, and get up your strength by a cup of
wdne." So the youth, not suspecting anything wrong, carried the dead
boar into his brother's house, and told him of the little man he had met in the wood, who had given him the spear, and how he had killed the wild animal.
The elder brother persuaded him to stay and rest till the evening,
and then they went out together in the twilight and walked by the
river till it became quite dark. A Httle bridge lay across the river,
over which they had to pass, and the elder brother let the young
one go before him. When they arrived at the middle of the stream
the wicked man gave his younger brother a blow from behind, and
he fell down dead instantly.
But fearing he might not be quite dead, he threw the body over
the bridge into the river, and through the clear waters saw it sink
into the sand. After this wicked deed he ran home quickly, took the
dead wild boar on his shoulders, and carried it to the King, with
the pretense that he had killed the animal, and that therefore he
6o Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
could claim the Princess as his wife, according to the King's promise.
But these dark deeds are not often concealed, for something happens to bring them to light. Not many years after, a herdsman,
passing over the bridge with his flock, saw beneath him in the sand
a little bone as white as snow, and thought that it would make a
very nice mouthpiece for his horn.
As soon as the flock passed over the bridge, he waded into the
middle of the stream— for the water was very shallow— took up the
bone, and carried it home to make a mouthpiece for his horn.
But the first time he blew the horn after the bone was in it, it
fiUed the herdsman with wonder and amazement; for it began to
sing of itself, and these were the words it sang:
"Ah! dear shepherd, you are blowing your horn With one of my bones, which night and morn Lie still unburied, beneath the uMve
Where I was thrown in a sandy grave.
I killed the wild boar, and my brother slew me.
And gained the Princess by pretending 'twas he."
**What a wonderful horn," said the shepherd, "that can sing of itself! I must certainly take it to my lord, the King." As soon as the horn was brought before the King and blown by
the shepherd, it at once began to siag the same song and the same words.
The King was at first surprised, but his suspicion being aroused,
he ordered that the sand under the bridge should be examined immediately, and then the entire skeleton of the murdered man was
discovered, and the whole wicked deed came to Hght.
The wicked brother could not deny the deed. He was therefore
ordered to be tied in a sack and drowned, while the remains of his
murdered brother were carefully carried to the churchyard, and
laid to rest in a beautiful grave.
Maid Maleen
There was once a King who had a son who asked in marriage the
daughter of a mighty King; she was called Maid Maleen, and was
Maid Maleen 6i
very beautiful. As her father wished to give her to another, the
Prince was rejected; but as they both loved each other with all their
hearts, they would not give each other up, and Maid Maleen said to
her father, "I can and v^oll take no other for my husband." Then the King flew into a passion, and ordered a dark tower to
be built, into which no ray of sunlight or moonlight should enter.
When it was finished, he said, "Therein shalt thou be imprisoned for seven years, and then I will come and see if thy perverse spirit
is broken." Meat and drink for the seven years were carried into the tower, and then she and her waiting-woman were led into it and
walled up, and thus cut off from the sky and from the earth. There
they sat in the darkness, and knew not when day or night began.
The King's son often went round and round the tower, and called their names, but no sound from without pierced through the thick
walls. What else could they do but lament and complain?
Meanwhile the time passed, and by the diminution of the food
and drink they knew that the seven years were coming to an end.
They thought the moment of their dehverance was come; but no
stroke of the hammer was heard, no stone fell out of the wall, and it
seemed to Maid Maleen that her father had forgotten her. As they
only had food for a short time longer, and saw a miserable death
awaiting them, Maid Maleen said, "We must try our last chance,
and see if we can break through the wall." She took the bread- knife, and picked and bored at the mortar of a stone, and when she
was tired, the waiting-maid took her turn. With great labor they
succeeded in getting out one stone, and then a second, and third,
and when three days were over the first ray of light fell on their
darkness, and at last the opening was so large that they could look out.
The sky was blue, and a fresh breeze played on their faces; but
how melancholy everything looked all aroundl Her father's castle lay in ruins, the town and the villages were, so far as could be seen,
destroyed by fire, the fields far and wide laid to waste, and no
human being was visible. When the opening in the wall was large
enough for them to slip through, the waiting-maid sprang down first, and then Maid Maleen followed. But where were they to go?
The enemy had ravaged the whole kingdom, driven away the King,
and slain all the inhabitants. They wandered forth to seek another
country, but nowhere did they find a shelter, or a human being to
give them a mouthful of bread, and their need was so great that
they were forced to appease their hunger vidth nettles. When, after
62 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
long journeying, they came into another country, they tried to get
work everywhere; but wherever they knocked they were turned
away, and no one would have pity on them. At last they arrived in
a large city and went to the royal palace. There also they were ordered to go away, but at last the cook said that they might stay in the kitchen and be scullions.
The son of the King in whose kingdom they were, was, however,
the very man who had been betrothed to Maid Maleen. His father
had chosen another bride for him, whose face was as ugly as her
heart was wicked. The wedding was fixed, and the maiden had already arrived; because of her great ugliness, however, she shut her- self in her room, and allowed no one to see her, and Maid Maleen
had to take her her meals from the kitchen. When the day came for
the bride and the bridegroom to go to church, she was ashamed of
her ugHness, and afraid that if she showed herself in the streets, she
would be mocked and laughed at by the people.
Then said she to Maid Maleen, "A great piece of luck has befal- len thee. I have sprained my foot, and caimot well walk through
the streets; thou shalt put on my wedding-clothes and take my
place; a greater honor than that thou canst not have!" Maid Maleen, however, refused it, and said, "I wish for no honor which is
not suitable for me." It was in vain, too, that the bride offered her
gold. At last she said angrily, "If thou dost not obey me, it shall cost thee thy life. I have but to speak the word, and thy head will
lie at thy feet." Then she was forced to obey, and put on the
bride's magnificent clothes and all her jewels. When she entered the royal haU, every one was amazed at her great beauty, and the
King said to his son, "This is the bride whom I have chosen for
thee, and whom thou must lead to church." The bridegroom was
astonished, and thought, "She is Hke my Maid Maleen, and I should believe that it was she herself, but she has long been shut
up in the tower, or dead." He took her by the hand and led her to church. On the way was a nettle-plant, and she said,
"Oh, nettle-plant. Little nettle-plant. What dost thou here alone?
I have known the time
When I ate thee unboiled,
When I ate thee unroasted."
"What art thou saying?" asked the King's son. "Nothing," she
replied, "I was only thinking of Maid Maleen." He was surprised
Maid Maleen 63
that she knew about her, but kept silence. When they came to the
foot-plank into the churchyard, she said,
"Foot-bridge, do not break,
I am not the true bride."
*What art thou saying there?" asked the King's son. 'Toothing,"
she replied, "1 was only thinking of Maid Maleen." 'TDost thou
know Maid Maleen?" "No," she answered, "how should I know her;
I have only heard of her." When they came to the church-door, she said once more,
"Church-door, break not,
I am not the true bride."
"What art thou saying there?" asked he. "Ah," she answered, "I
was only thinking of Maid Maleen." Then he took out a precious chain, put it round her neck, and fastened the clasp. Thereupon
they entered the church, and the priest joined their hands together
before the altar, and married them. He led her home, but she did
not speak a single word the whole way. When they got back to the
royal palace, she hurried into the bride's chamber, put off the magnificent clothes and the jewels, dressed herself in her gray
gown, and kept nothing but the jewel on her neck, which she had
received from the bridegroom.
When the night came, and the bride was to be led into the
Prince's apartment, she let her veil fall over her face, that he might not observe the deception. As soon as every one had gone away, he
said to her, "What didst thou say to the nettle-plant which was growing by the wayside?" "To which nettle-plant?" asked she; "I don't
talk to nettle-plants." "If thou didst not do it, then thou art not the
true bride," said he. So she bethought herself, and said,
"I must go out unto my maid.
Who keeps my thoughts for me."
She went out and sought Maid Maleen. "Girl, what hast thou been
saying to the nettle?" "I said nothing but,
'Oh, nettle-plant.
Little nettle-plant. What dost thou here alone?
I have known the time
When I ate thee unboiled.
When I ate thee unroasted.'"
The bride ran back into the chamber, and said, "I know now
64 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
what I said to the nettle," and she repeated the words which she
had just heard. "But what didst thou say to the foot-bridge when
we went over it?" asked the King's son. "To the foot-bridge?" she
answered; "I don't talk to foot-bridges." "Then thou art not the true
bride." She again said,
"I must go out unto my maid.
Who keeps my thoughts for me"
and ran out and found Maid Maleen, "Girl, what didst thou say to
the foot-bridge?" "I said nothing but,
'Foot-bridge, do not break,
I am not the true bride.'"
"That costs thee thy lifel" cried the bride, but she hurried into
the room, and said, "I know now what I said to the foot-bridge,"
and she repeated the words. "But what didst thou say to the
church-door?" "To the church-door?" she replied; "I don't talk to
church-doors." "Then thou art not the true bride."
She went out and found Maid Maleen, and said, "Girl, what
didst thou say to the church-door?" "I said nothing but,
'Church-door, break not,
I am not the true bride'"
"That will break thy neck for thee!" cried the bride, and flew into
a terrible passion, but she hastened back into the room, and said, "I
know now what I said to the church-door," and she repeated the
words. "But where hast thou the jewel which I gave thee at the
church-door?" "What jewel?" she answered; "thou didst not give
me any jewel." "I myself put it round thy neck, and I myself fastened it; if thou dost not know that, thou art not the true bride." He drew the veil from her face, and when he saw her immeasurable
ugliness, he sprang back terrified, and said, "How comest thou
here? Who art thou?" "I am thy betrothed bride, but because I feared lest the people should mock me when they saw me out of
doors, I commanded the scullery-maid to dress herself in my
clothes, and to go to chiurch instead of me." "Where is the girl?"
said he; "I want to see her, go and bring her here." She went out and told the servants that the scullery-maid was an impostor, and
that they must take her out into the court-yard and strike oflF her
head. The servants laid hold of Maid Maleen and wanted to drag
her out, but she screamed so loudly for help, that the King's son
The Goose-Girl 65
heard her voice, hurried out of his chamber and ordered them to
set the maiden free instantly.
Lights were brought, and then he saw on her neck the gold chain
which he had given her at the church-door. "Thou art the true
bride," said he, "who went with me to church; come with me now
to my room." When they were both alone, he said, "On the way to the church thou didst name Maid Maleen, who was my betrothed
bride; if I could believe it possible, I should think she was standing
before me— thou art like her in every respect." She answered, "I am Maid Maleen, who for thy sake was imprisoned seven years in the
darkness, who suflEered hunger and thirst, and has lived so long in
want and poverty. Today, however, the sun is shining on me once
more. I was married to thee in the church, and I am thy lawful
wife." Then they kissed each other, and were happy all the days of their lives. The false bride was rewarded for what she had done by
having her head cut o£E.
The tower in which Maid Maleen had been imprisoned remained
standing for a long time, and when the children passed by it they
sang,
"Kling, klang, gloria. Who sits within this tower?
A Kin^s daughter, she sits tvithin,
A sight of her I cannot win. The wall it will not break.
The stone cannot be pierced.
Little Hans, with your coat so gay.
Follow me, follow me, fast as you may."
The Goose-Girl
Thebe was once upon a time an old Queen whose husband had
been dead for many years, and she had a beautiful daughter. When
the Princess grew up she was betrothed to a Prince who lived at a
great distance. When the time came for her to be married, and she
had to journey forth into the distant kingdom, the aged Queen
packed up for her many costly vessels of silver and gold, and trinkets also of gold and silver, and cups and jewels; in short, everything
66 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
which appertained to a royal dowry, for she loved her child with all
her heart. She likewise sent her maid in waiting, who was to ride
with her, and hand her over to the bridegroom, and each had a
horse for the journey, but the horse of the King's daughter was called Falada, and could speak. So when the hour of parting had
come, the aged mother went into her bed-room, took a small knife
and cut her finger with it until it bled, then she held a white handkerchief to it into which she let three drops of blood fall, gave it to
her daughter and said, "Dear child, preserve this carefully; it will
be of service to you on your way." So they took a sorrowful leave of each other; the Princess put the
piece of cloth in her bosom, mounted her horse, and then went
away to her bridegroom. After she had ridden for a while she felt a
burning thirst, and said to her waiting-maid, "Dismount, and take my cup which you have brought for me, and get me some water
from the stream, for I should like to drink." "If you are thirsty,"
said the waiting-maid, "get off yomr horse yourself, and lie down
and drink out of the water, I don't choose to be your servant." So in her great thirst the Princess alighted, bent down over the water in
the stream and drank, and was not allowed to drink out of the
golden cup. Then she said, "Ah, Heavenl" And the three drops of
blood answered, "If your mother knew this, her heart would
break." But the King's daughter was humble, said nothing, and mounted her horse again.
She rode some miles further, but the day was warm, the sun
scorched her, and she was thirsty once more, and when they came
to a stream of water, she again cried to her waiting-maid, "Dismount, and give me some water in my golden cup," for she had
long ago forgotten the girl's ill words. But the waiting-maid said
still more haughtily, "If you wish to drink, drink as you can, I don't
choose to be your maid." Then in her great thirst the King's daughter aKghted, bent over the flowing stream, wept and said, "Ah,
Heavenl" And the drops of blood again replied, "If your mother
knew this, her heart would break." And as she was thus drinking and leaning right over the stream, the handkerchief with the three
drops of blood fell out of her bosom, and floated away with the
water without her observing it, so great was her trouble.
The waiting-maid, however, had seen it, and she rejoiced to think
that she had now power over the bride, for since the Princess had
lost the drops of blood, she had become weak and powerless. So
now when she wanted to mount her horse again, the one that was
The Goose-Girl 67
called Falada, the waiting-maid said, "Falada is more suitable for
me, and my nag will do for you," and the Princess had to be con- tent with that. Then the waiting-maid, with many hard words, bade
the Princess exchange her royal apparel for her own shabby
clothes; and at length she was compelled to swear by the clear sky
above her, that she would not say one word of this to any one at
the royal court, and if she had not taken this oath she would have
been killed on the spot. But Falada saw all this, and observed it well.
The waiting-maid now mounted Falada, and the true bride the
bad horse, and thus they traveled onwards, until at length they entered the royal palace. There were great rejoicings over her arrival,
and the Prince sprang forward to meet her, lifted the waiting-maid
from her horse, and thought she was his consort. She was conducted upstairs, but the real Princess was left standing below. Then
the old King looked out of the window and saw her standing in the
courtyard, and how dainty and delicate and beautiful she was, and
instantly went to the royal apartment, and asked the bride about
the girl she had with her who was standing down below in the
courtyard, and who she was. "I picked her up on my way for a companion; give the girl something to work at, that she may not
stand idle." But the old King had no work for her, and knew of none, so he
said, "I have a little boy who tends the geese, she may help him." The boy was called Conrad, and the true bride had to help him
tend the geese. Soon afterwards the false bride said to the young
King, "Dearest husband, I beg you to do me a favor." He answered, "I will do so most willingly." 'Then send for the knacker, and have the head of the horse on which I rode here cut ofiF, for it
vexed me on the way." In reality, she was afraid that the horse
might tell how she had behaved to the King's daughter. Then she succeeded in making the King promise that it should be done, and the faithful Falada was to die.
This came to the ears of the real Princess, and she secretly promised to pay the knacker a piece of gold if he would perform a small
service for her. There was a great dark-looking gateway in the town, through which morning and evening she had to pass with the
geese; would he be so good as to nail up Falada's head on it, so that
she might see him again, more than once. The knacker's man prom- ised to do that, and cut off the head, and nailed it fast beneath the
dark gateway.
68 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
Early in the morning, when she and Conrad drove out their flock
beneath this gateway, she said in passing,
"Alas, Falada, hanging there!"
Then the head answered,
"Alas, young Queen, how ill you fare! If this your tender mother knew.
Her heart would surely break in two."
Then they went still further out of the town, and drove their
geese into the country. And when they had come to the meadow,
she sat down and unbound her hair which was like pure gold, and
Conrad saw it and delighted in its brightness, and wanted to pluck
out a few hairs. Then she said,
"Blow, blow, thou gentle unnd, I say.
Blow Conrad's little hat away. And make him chase it here and there.
Until I have braided all my hair.
And bound it up again."
And there came such a violent wind that it blew Conrad's hat far away across country, and he was forced to rxm after it. When he
came back she had finished combing her hair and was putting it up
again, and he could not get any of it. Then Conrad was angry, and
would not speak to her, and thus they watched the geese until the
evening, and then they went home.
Next day when they were driving the geese out through the dark
gateway, the maiden said,
"Alas, Falada, hanging thereF'
Falada answered,
"Alas, young Queen, how ill you fare! If this your tender mother knew.
Her heart would surely break in two."
And she sat down again in the field and began to comb out her
hair, and Conrad ran and tried to clutch it, so she said in haste,
"Blow, blow, thou gentle wind, I say.
Blow Conrad's little hat away, And make him chase it here and there.
Until I have braided all my hair.
And bound it up again."
The Goose-Girl 69
Then the wind blew, and blew his little hat oflF his head and far
away, and Conrad was forced to run after it, and when he came
back, her hair had been put up a long time, and he could get none
of it, and so they looked after their geese till evening came.
But in the evening after they had got home, Conrad went to the
old King, and said, "I won't tend the geese with that girl any
longerl" "Why not?" inquired the aged King. "Oh, because she
vexes me the whole day long." Then the aged King commanded
him to relate what it was that she did to him. And Conrad said, "In the morning when we pass beneath the dark gateway with the
flock, there is a sorry horse's head on the wall, and she says to it,
'Alas, Falada, hanging thereF
"And the head replies,
'Alas, young Queen, how ill you fare! If this your tender mother knew.
Her heart would surely break in two.'"
And Conrad went on to relate what happened on the goose pasture, and how when there he had to chase his hat.
The aged King commanded him to drive his flock out again next
day, and as soon as morning came, he placed himself behind the
dark gateway, and heard how the maiden spoke to the head of
Falada, and then he too went into the country, and hid himself in
the thicket in the meadow. There he soon saw with his own eyes
the goose-girl and the goose-boy bringing their flock, and how after
a while she sat down and unplaited her hair, which shone with radi- ance. And soon she said,
"Blow, blow, thou gentle wind, I say. Blow Conrads little hat away.
And make him chase it here and there.
Until I have braided all my hair.
And bound it up again."
Then came a blast of wind and carried off Conrad's hat, so that he had to run far away, while the maiden quietly went on combing
and plaiting her hair, all of which the King observed. Then, quite
unseen, he went away, and when the goose-girl came home in the
evening, he called her aside, and asked why she did all these
things. "I may not tell you that, and I dare not lament my sorrows to any human being, for I have sworn not to do so by the heaven
which is above me; if I had not done that, I should have lost my
70 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
life." He urged her and left her no peace, but he could draw nothing from her. Then said he, "If you will not tell me anything, tell
your sorrows to the iron-stove there," and he went away. Then she crept into the iron-stove, and began to weep and lament, and emptied her whole heart, and said, "Here am I deserted
by the whole world, and yet I am a King's daughter, and a false waiting-maid has by force brought me to such a pass that I have
been compelled to put off my royal apparel, and she has taken my
place with my bridegroom, and I have to perform menial service as
a goose-girl. If my mother did but know that, her heart would
break." The aged King, however, was standing outside by the pipe of the
stove, and was listening to what she said, and heard it. Then he
came back again, and bade her come out of the stove. And royal
garments were placed on her, and it was marvelous how beautiful
she wasl The aged King summoned his son, and revealed to him
that he had got the false bride who was only a waiting-maid, but
that the true one was standing there, as the sometime goose-girl. The young King rejoiced with all his heart when he saw her beauty
and youth, and a great feast was made ready to which all the peo- ple and all good friends were invited.
At the head of the table sat the bridegroom with the King's daughter at one side of him, and the waiting-maid on the other, but
the waiting-maid was bhnded, and did not recognize the Princess
in her dazzling array. When they had eaten and drunk, and were
merry, the aged King asked the waiting-maid as a riddle, what a
person deserved who had behaved in such and such a way to her
master, and at the same time related the whole story, and asked what sentence such an one merited.
Then the false bride said, "She deserves no better fate than to be stripped entirely naked, and put in a barrel which is studded inside
with pointed nails, and two white horses should be harnessed to it,
which will drag her along through one street after another, till she
is dead." "It is you," said the aged King, "and you have pronounced yoiur own sentence, and thus shall it be done unto you." When the sentence had been carried out, the young King married
his true bride, and both of them reigned over their kingdom in
peace and happiness.
The Skilful Huntsman
There once was a young fellow who had learnt the trade of locksmith, and told his father he would now go out into the world and
seek his fortune. "Very well," said the father, "I am quite content
with that," and gave him some money for his journey. So he trav- eled about and looked for work. After a time he resolved not to follow the trade of locksmith any more, for he no longer liked it, but he
took a fancy for hunting. Then there met him in his rambles a
huntsman dressed in green, who asked whence he came and
whither he was going. The youth said he was a locksmith's appren- tice, but that the trade no longer pleased him, and he had a lildng
for huntsmanship— would he teach it to him? "Oh, yes," said the
huntsman, "if thou wilt go with me." The young fellow went with him, bound himself to him for some
years, and learnt the art of hunting. After this he wished to try his
luck elsewhere, and the huntsman gave him nothing in the way of
payment but an air-gun, which had, however, this property, that it hit its mark without fail whenever he shot with it. Then he set out
and found himself in a very large forest, which he could not get to
the end of in one day. When evening came he seated himself in a
high tree in order to escape from the wild beasts.
Towards midnight, it seemed to him as if a tiny little light glimmered in the distance. He looked down through the branches towards it, and kept well in his mind where it was. But in the first
place, he took off his hat and threw it down in the direction of the
light, so that he might go to the hat as a mark when he had descended. Then he got down and went to his hat, put it on again and
went straight forwards. The farther he went, the larger the light
grew, and when he got close to it he saw that it was an enormous
fire, and that three giants were sitting by it, who had an ox on the
spit, and were roasting it. Presently one of them said, "I must just
taste if the meat will soon be fit to eat," and pulled a piece off, and was about to put it in his mouth when the huntsman shot it out of
his hand. "Well, really," said the giant, "if the wind has not blown
the bit out of my hand!" and helped himself to another. But when he was just about to bite into it, the huntsman again shot it away
from him. On this the giant gave the one who was sitting next him
72 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
a box on the ear, and cried angrily, "Why art thou snatching my
piece away from me?" "I have not snatched it away," said the
other, "a sharpshooter must have shot it away from thee." The giant took another piece, but could not, however, keep it in his
hand, for the huntsman shot it out. Then the giant said. That must
be a good shot to shoot the bit out of one's very mouth, such an one
would be useful to us." And he cried aloud, "Come here, thou sharpshooter, seat thyself at the fire beside us and eat thy fill, we
will not hurt thee; but if thou wilt not come, and we have to bring
thee by force, thou art a lost manl" At this invitation the youth went up to them and told them he
was a skilled huntsman, and that whatever he aimed at with his
gun, he was certain to hit. Then they said if he would go with them
he should be well treated, and they told him that outside the forest
there was a great lake, behind which stood a tower, and in the
tower was imprisoned a lovely Princess, whom they wished very
much to carry ofiE. "Yes," said he, "I will soon get her for you."
Then they added, "But there is still something else; there is a tiny Httle dog, which begins to bark directly any one goes near, and as
soon as it barks every one in the royal palace wakens up, and for
this reason we cannot get there; canst thou imdertake to shoot it
dead?" "Yes," said he, "that will be a Httle bit of fun for me." After this he got into a boat and rowed over the lake, and as soon as he
landed, the little dog came running out, and was about to bark, but
the huntsman took his air-gun and shot it dead. When the giants
saw that, they rejoiced, and thought they already had the King's daughter safe, but the huntsman wished first to see how matters
stood, and told them that they must stay outside until he called
them. Then he went into the castle, and aU was perfectly quiet
within, and every one was asleep.
When he opened the door of the first room, a sword was hanging
on the wall which was made of pure silver, and there was a golden
star on it, and the name of the King, and on a table near it lay a
sealed letter which he broke open, and inside it was written that
whosoever had the sword could kill everything which opposed him.
So he took the sword from the wall, hung it at his side and went
onwards; then he entered the room where the King's daughter was lying sleeping, and she was so beautiful that he stood still and,
holding his breath, looked at her. He thought to himself, "How can I give an innocent maiden into the power of the wild giants, who
have evil in their minds?" He looked about further, and under the
bed stood a pair of slippers; on the right one was her father's name
The Skilful Huntsman 73
with a star, and on the left her own name with a star. She wore ako
a great neck-kerchief of silk embroidered with gold, and on the
right side was her father's name, and on the left her own, all in golden letters. Then the huntsman took a pair of scissors and cut
the right comer off, and put it in his knapsack, and then he also
took the right slipper with the King^s name, and thrust that in. The maiden still lay sleeping, and she was quite sewn into her
night-dress, and he cut a morsel from this also, and thrust it in with
the rest, but he did all without touching her. Then he went forth
and left her lying asleep undisturbed, and when he came to the
gate again, the giants were still standing outside waiting for him,
and expecting that he was bringing the Princess. But he cried to
them that they were to come in, for the maiden was already in their
power, that he could not open the gate to them, but there was a
hole through which they must creep. Then the first approached,
and the huntsman wound the giant's hair round his hand, pulled the head in, and cut it off at one stroke with his sword, and then
drew the rest of him in. He called to the second and cut his head
off likewise, and then he killed the third also, and he was well
pleased that he had freed the beautiful maiden from her enemies,
and he cut out their tongues and put them in his knapsack. Then
thought he, "1 will go home to my father and let him see what I have already done, and afterwards I wiU travel about the world;
the luck which God is pleased to grant me wiU easily find me." When the King in the castle awoke, he saw the three giants lying
there dead. So he went into the sleeping-room of his daughter,
awoke her, and asked who could have killed the giants. Then said
she, T>ear father, I know not, I have been asleep." But when she arose and would have put on her sfippers, the right one was gone,
and when she looked at her neck-kerchief it was cut, and the right
comer was missing, and when she looked at her night-dress a piece
was cut out of it. The King summoned his whole court together,
soldiers and every one else who was there, and asked who had set
his daughter at liberty, and killed the giants.
Now it happened that he had a captain, who was one-eyed and a hideous man, and he said that he had done it. Then the old King
said that as he had accomplished this, he should marry his daughter. But the maiden said, "Rather than marry him, dear father, I
will go away into the world as far as my legs can carry me." The King said that if she would not marry him she should take off her
royal garments and wear peasant's clothing, and go forth, and that she should go to a potter, and begin a trade in earthen vessels. So
74 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
she put off her royal apparel, and went to a potter and borrowed
crockery enough for a stall, and she promised him also that if she
had sold it by the evening, she would pay for it. Then the King said
she was to seat herself in a comer with it and seU it, and he arranged with some peasants to drive over it with their carts, so that
everything should be broken into a thousand pieces. When therefore the King's daughter had placed her stall in the street, by came the carts, and broke all she had into tiny fragments. She began to
weep and said, "Alas, how shall I ever pay for the pots now?" The King had, however, wished by this to force her to marry the captain; but instead of that, she again went to the potter, and asked
him if he would lend to her once more. He said, "No," she must first pay for the things she had already had.
Then she went to her father and cried and lamented, and said
she would go forth into the world. Then said he, "I will have a little hut built for thee in the forest outside, and in it thou shalt stay aU
thy life long and cook for every one, but thou shalt take no money
for it." When the hut was ready, a sign was hung on the door
whereon was written, "Today given, tomorrow sold." There she remained a long time, and it was rumored about the world that a
maiden was there who cooked without asking for payment, and
that this was set forth on a sign outside her door. The huntsman
heard it likewise, and thought to himself, "That would suit thee.
Thou art poor, and hast no money." So he took his air-gun and his knapsack, wherein all the things which he had formerly carried
away with him from the castle as tokens of his truthfulness were
still lying, and went into the forest, and found the hut with the
sign, "Today given, tomorrow sold." He had put on the sword with which he had cut off the heads of
the three giants, and thus entered the hut, and ordered something
to eat to be given to him. He was charmed with the beautiful
maiden, who was indeed as lovely as any picture. She asked him
whence he came and whither he was going, and he said, "I am
roaming about the world." Then she asked him where he had got
the sword, for that truly her father's name was on it. He asked her
if she were the King's daughter. "Yes," answered she. "With this
sword," said he, "did I cut off the heads of three giants," And he took their tongues out of his knapsack in proof. Then he also
showed her the sHpper, and the comer of the neck-kerchief, and the
bit of the night-dress. Hereupon she was overjoyed, and said that he was the one who had delivered her.
They went together to the old King, and fetched him to the hut,
The Princess in Disguise 75
and she led him into her room, and told him that the huntsman was
the man who had really set her free from the giants. And when the
aged King saw all the proofs of this, he could no longer doubt, and
said that he was very glad he knew how everything had happened,
and that the huntsman should have her to wife, on which the maiden was glad at heart. Then she dressed the huntsman as if he were
a foreign lord, and the King ordered a feast to be prepared. When
they went to table, the captain sat on the left side of the King's daughter, but the huntsman was on the right, and the captain
thought he was a foreign lord who had come on a visit.
When they had eaten and drunk, the old King said to the captain
that he would set before him something which he must guess.
"Supposing any one said that he had killed the three giants and he
were asked where the giants' tongues were, and he were forced to go and look, and there were none in their heads, how could that
happen?" The captain said, "Then they cannot have had any." "Not
So," said the King. "Every animal has a tongue," and then he like- wise asked what any one would deserve who made such an answer.
The captain replied, "He ought to be torn in pieces." Then the King said he had pronounced his own sentence, and the captain
was put in prison and then torn in four pieces; but the King's daughter was married to the huntsman. After this he brought his
father and mother, and they lived with their son in happiness, and
after the death of the old King he received the kingdom.
The Princess in Disguise
A KING once had a wife with golden hair who was so beautiful that
none on earth could be found equal to her. It happened that she
fell ill, and as soon as she knew she must die, she sent for the King
and said to him, "After my death I know you will marry another wife; but you must promise me that, however beautiful she may be,
if she is not as beautiful as I am and has not golden hair Uke mine
you will not marry her." The King had no sooner given his promise than she closed her
eyes and died.
For a long time he refused to be comforted, and thought it was
impossible he could ever take another wife. At length his counselors
76 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
came to him, and said, "A King should not remain unmarried; we
ought to have a Queen." So he at last consented, and then messengers were sent far and
wide to find a bride whose beauty should equal that of the dead
Queen. But none was to be found in the whole world; for even
when equally beautiful they had not golden hair. So the messengers
returned without obtaining what they sought.
Now, the King had a daughter who was quite as beautiful as her
dead mother, and had also golden hair. She had all this while been
growing up, and very soon the King noticed how exactly she re- sembled her dead mother. So he sent for his counselors, and said to
them, "1 wiU marry my daughter; she is the image of my dead wife, and no other bride can be found to enable me to keep my promise
to her." When the counselors heard this, they were dreadfully shocked,
and said, 'It is forbidden for a father to marry his daughter; noth- ing but evil could spring from such a sin, and the kingdom will be
ruined."
When the King's daughter heard of her father's proposition she was greatly alarmed, the more so as she saw how resolved he was
to carry out his intention. She hoped, however, to be able to save
him and herself from such ruin and disgrace, so she said to him,
"Before I consent to yoiu- wish I shall require three things— a dress as golden as the sim, another as silvery as the moon, and a third as
glittering as the stars; and besides this, I shall require a mantle
made of a thousand sldns of rough fur sewn together, and every animal in the kingdom must give a piece of his skin toward it."
"Ahl" she thought, 1 have asked for impossibilities, and I hope I
shall be able to make my father give up his wicked intentions." The King, however, was not to be diverted from his purpose. All
the most skilful young women in the kingdom were employed to
weave the three dresses, one to be as golden as the sun, another as
silvery as the moon, and the third as glittering as the stars. He sent
hunters into the forest to kill the wild animals and bring home their
sldns, of which the mantle was to be made; and at last when all was
finished he brought them and laid them before her, and then said,
"Tomorrow our marriage shall take place."
Then the King's daughter saw that there was no hope of changing her father's heart, so she determined to run away from the castle.
In the night, when every one slept, she rose and took from her
jewel-case a gold ring, a gold spinning-wheel, and a golden hook.
The Princess in Disguise 77
The three dresses of the sun, moon, and stars she folded in so small
a parcel that they were placed in a walnut-shell; then she put on
the fur mantle, stained her face and hands black with walnut-jwice, and committing herself to the care of Heaven, she left her home.
After traveling the whole night she came at last to a large forest,
and feeling very tired she crept into a hollow tree and went to
sleep. The sun rose, but she still slept on, and did not awake till
nearly noon.
It happened on this very day that the King to whom the wood
belonged was hunting in the forest, and when his hoimds came to
the tree they sniffed about, and ran round and roimd the tree barking loudly. The King called to his hunters, and said, "J^^* go and
see what wild animal the dogs are barking at." They obeyed, and quickly returning told the King that in the hol- low tree was a most beautiful creatiure, such as they had never seen
before, that the sldn was covered with a thousand different sorts of
fur, and that it was fast asleep.
"Then," said the King, "go and see if you can captiure it alive.
Then bind it on the wagon and bring it home." While the hunters were binding the maiden she awoke, and full
of terror cried out to them, "I am only a poor child, forsaken by my
father and mother; take pity on me, and take me with youl" "Well,"
they replied, "you may be useful to the cook, little Roughsldn.
Come with us; you can at least sweep up the ashes."
So they seated her on the wagon and took her home to the King's castle. They showed her a little stable under the steps, where no
daylight ever came, and said, "Roughsldn, here you can Hve and
sleep." So the King's daughter was sent into the kitchen to fetch the wood, draw the water, stir the fire, pluck the fowls, look after the
vegetables, sweep the ashes, and do all the hard work.
Poor Roughskin, as they called her, lived for a long time most
miserably, and the beautiful icing's daughter knew not when it would end or how. It happened, however, after a time that a festival was to take place in the castle, so she said to the cook, "May I go out for a Httle while to see the company arrive? I will stand outside the door." "Yes, you may go," he replied, 'Taut in half an hour I
shall want you to sweep up the ashes and put the kitchen in order." Then she took her little oil-lamp, went into the stable, threw off
the fur coat, washed the nut-stains from her face and hands, so that
her full beauty appeared before the day. After this she opened the
nutshell and took out the dress that was golden as the sun, and put
it on. As soon as she was quite dressed she went out and presented
78 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
herself at the entrance of the castle as a visitor. No one recognized
her as Roughskin; they thought she was a King's daughter, and sent and told the King of her arrival. He went to receive her, ofiFered her
his hand, and while they danced together he thought in his heart,
"My eyes have never seen any maiden before so beautiful as this." As soon as the dance was over she bowed to the King, and before
he could look round she had vanished, no one knew where. The
sentinel at the castle gate was called and questioned, but he had
not seen any one pass.
But she had run to her stable, quickly removed her dress, stained
her face and hands, put on her fur coat, and was again Roughskin.
When she entered the kitchen and began to do her work and sweep
up the ashes, the cook said, "Leave that alone till tomorrow; I want you to cook some soup for the King. I will also taste a httle when it
is ready. But do not let one of your hairs faU in, or you will get
nothing to eat in future from me."
Then the cook went out, and Roughskin made the King's soup as nicely as she could, and cut bread for it, and when it was ready she
fetched from her Httle stable her gold ring and laid it in the dish in
which the soup was prepared.
After the King had left the baU-room he called for the soup, and while eating it thought he had never tasted better soup in his life.
But when the dish was nearly empty he saw to his surprise a gold
ring lying at the bottom, and could not imagine how it came there.
Then he ordered the cook to come to him, and he was in a terrible
fright when he heard the order. "You must certainly have let a hair
fall into the soup; if you have, I shall thrash youl" he said.
As soon as he appeared the King said, "Who cooked this soup?"
"I cooked it," he replied. "That is not true," said the King. 'This soup is made quite differently and much better than you ever made
Then it" the cook was obliged to confess that Roughskin had made
the soup. "Go and send her to me," said the King.
As soon as she appeared the King said to her, "Who art thou,
maiden?" She replied, "I am a poor child, without father or
mother." He asked again, "Why are you in my castle?" "Because I
am trying to earn my bread by helping the cook," she replied.
"How came this ring in the soup?" he said again. 'T. know nothing
about the ringi" she replied. When the King found he could learn nothing from Roughskin, he
sent her away. A httle time after this there was another festival,
and Roughskin had again permission from the cook to go and see
The Princess in Disguise 79
the visitor, ^^ut," he added, "come back in half an hour and cook
for the King the soup that he is so fond of." She promised to return, and ran quickly into her httle stable,
washed off the stains, and took out of the nutshell her dress, silvery
as the moon, and put it on. Then she appeared at the castle like a
King's daughter, and the King came to receive her with great pleas- ure; he was so glad to see her again, and while the dancing continued the King kept her as his partner. When the baU ended she
disappeared so quickly that the King could not imagine what had
become of her. But she had rushed down to her stable, made herself again the rough little creature that was called Roughskan, and
went into the kitchen to cook the soup.
While the cook was upstairs she fetched the golden spinning-wheel and dropped it into the soup as soon as it was ready. The King again ate it with great relish; it was as good as before,
and when he sent for the cook and asked who made it, he was
obliged to own that it was Roughsldn. She was also ordered to appear before the King, but he could get nothing out of her, excepting that she was a poor child, and knew nothing of the golden spinning-wheel.
At the King's third festival everything happened as before. But
the cook said, "I will let you go and see the dancing-room this time, Roughskin; but I beheve you are a witch, for although the soup is
good, and the King says it is better than I can make it, there is always something dropped into it which I cannot understand." Roughskin did not stop to listen; she ran quickly to her little stable,
washed off the nut-stains, and this time dressed herself in the dress
that glittered hke the stars. When the King came as before to receive her in the hall, he thought he had never seen such a beautiful
woman in his Hfe. While they were dancing he contrived, without
being noticed by the maiden, to slip a gold ring on her finger, and
he had given orders that the dancing should continue longer than
usual. When it ended, he wanted to hold her hand still, but she
pulled it away, and sprang so quickly among the people that she
vanished from his eyes.
She ran out of breath to her stable under the steps, for she knew
that she had remained longer away than half an hour, and there
was not time to take off her dress, so she threw on her fur cloak
over it, and in her haste she did not make her face black enough,
nor hide her golden hair properly; her hands also remained white.
However, when she entered the kitchen, the cook was still away, so
she prepared the King's soup, and dropped into it the golden hook.
8o Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
The King, when he found another trinket in his soup, sent immediately for Roughskin, and as she entered the room he saw the ring
on her white finger which he had placed there. Instantly he seized
her hand and held her fast, but in her struggles to get free the fur
mantle opened and the star-gHttering dress was plainly seen. The
King caught the mantle and tore it off, and as he did so her golden
hair fell over her shoulders, and she stood before him in her full
splendor, and felt that she could no longer conceal who she was.
Then she wiped the soot and stains from her face, and was beautiful to the eyes of the King as any woman upon earth.
"You shall be my dear bride," said the King, "and we will never
be parted again, although I know not who you are." Then she told him her past history, and all that had happened to
her, and he foimd that she was, as he thought, a King's daughter. Soon after the marriage was celebrated, and they Hved happily till their death.
Cinderella
There was once a rich man whose wife lay sick, and when she felt
her end drawing near she called to her only daughter to come near
her bed, and said,
"Dear child, be good and pious, and God will always take care of you, and I will look down upon you from heaven, and will be with
you." And then she closed her eyes and died. The maiden went every
day to her mother's grave and wept, and was always pious and good. When the winter came the snow covered the grave with a
white covering, and when the sun came in the early spring and
melted it away, the man took to himself another wife.
The new wife brought two daughters home with her, and they
were beautiful and fair in appearance, but at heart were black and
ugly. And then began very evil times for the poor step-daughter.
"Is the stupid creature to sit in the same room with us?" said
they; "those who eat food must earn it. She is nothing but a
kitchen-maid!" They took away her pretty dresses, and put on her an old gray
kirtle, and gave her wooden shoes to wear.
Cinderella 8i
"Just look now at the proud princess, how she is decked out!" cried they laughing, and then they sent her into the kitchen. There
she was obliged to do heavy work from morning to night, get up
early in the morning, draw water, make the fires, cook, and wash.
Besides that, the sisters did their utmost to torment her— mocking
her, and strewing peas and lentils among the ashes, and setting
her to pick them up. In the evenings, when she was quite tired out
with her hard day's work, she had no bed to he on, but was obhged to rest on the hearth among the cinders. And because she always
looked dusty and dirty, as if she had slept in the cinders, they named her Cinderella.
It happened one day that the father went to the fair, and he
asked his two step-daughters what he should bring back for them.
"Fine clothesl" said one. "Pearls and jewels!" said the other. "But
what will you have, Cinderella?" said he. "The first twig, father, that strikes against yoiur hat on the way home; that is what I should
like you to bring me." So he bought for the two step-daughters fine clothes, pearls, and
jewels, and on his way back, as he rode through a green lane, a
hazel twig struck against his hat; and he broke it ofi^ and carried it
home with him. And when he reached home he gave to the stepdaughters what they had wished for, and to Cinderella he gave the
hazel twig. She thanked him, and went to her mother's grave, and planted this twig there, weeping so bitterly that the tears fell upon it
and watered it, and it flourished and became a fine tree. Cinderella
went to see it three times a day, and wept and prayed, and each
time a white bird rose up from the tree, and if she uttered any wish
the bird brought her whatever she had wished for.
Now it came to pass that the King ordained a festival that should
last for three days, and to which all the beautiful yotmg women of
that country were bidden, so that the King's son might choose a bride from among them. When the two step-daughters heard that
they too were bidden to appear, they felt very pleased, and they
called Cinderella and said, "Comb our hair, brush our shoes, and make our buckles fast, we are going to the wedding feast at the
King's castle." When she heard this, Cinderella could not help crying, for she
too would have fiked to go to the dance, and she begged her stepmother to allow her. "What! You Cinderella!" said she, "in all your dust and dirt, you want to go to the festival! you that have no dress
and no shoes! you want to dance!" But as she persisted in asking, at last the step-mother said, 1
82 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
have strewed a dishful of lentils in the ashes, and if you can pick
them all up again in two hours you may go with us." Then the maiden went to the back-door that led into the garden, and called out,
"O gentle doves, O turtle-doves^ And all the birds that be, The lentils that in ashes lie
Come and pick up for me!
The good must be put in the dish.
The bad you may eat if you wish."
Then there came to the Idtchen-window two white doves, and
after them some turtle-doves, and at last a crowd of all the birds
under heaven, chirping and fluttering, and they alighted among the
ashes; and the doves nodded with their heads, and began to pick,
peck, pick, peck, and then aU the others began to pick, peck, pick,
peck, and put all the good grains into the dish. Before an hour was
over all was done, and they flew away.
Then the maiden brought the dish to her step-mother, feeling
joyful, and thinking that now she should go to the feast; but the
step-mother said, "No, Cinderella, you have no proper clothes, and
you do not know how to dance, and you would be laughed atl" And
when Cinderella cried for disappointment, she added, "If you can pick two dishes full of lentils out of the ashes, nice and clean, you
shall go with us," thinking to herself, "for that is not possible." When she had strewed two dishes full of lentils among the ashes
the maiden went through the back-door into the garden, and cried,
"O gentle doves, O turtle-doves. And all the birds that be. The lentils that in ashes lie
Come and pick up for met
The good must be put in the dish.
The bad you may eat if you wish."
So there came to the Idtchen-window two white doves, and then
some turtle-doves, and at last a crowd of all the other birds under
heaven, chirping and fluttering, and they aKghted among the ashes,
and the doves nodded with their heads and began to pick, peck,
pick, peck, and then all the others began to pick, peck, pick, peck,
and put all the good grains into the dish. And before half-an-hour was over it was all done, and they flew away. Then the maiden took
the dishes to the step-mother, feeling joyful, and thinking that now
she should go with them to the feast; but she said, "All this is of no
Cinderella 83
good to you; you cannot come with us, for you have no proper
clothes, and cannot dance; you would put us to shame." Then she turned her back on poor Cinderella and made haste to set out with
her two proud daughters.
And as there was no one left in the house, Cinderella went to her
mother's grave, under the hazel bush, and cried,
"Little tree, little tree, shake over me.
That silver and gold may come down and cover me."
Then the bird threw down a dress of gold and silver, and a pair
of slippers embroidered with silk and silver. And in all haste she
put on the dress and went to the festival. But her step-mother and
sisters did not know her, and thought she must be a foreign Princess, she looked so beautiful in her golden dress. Of Cinderella they
never thought at all, and supposed that she was sitting at home,
and picking the lentils out of the ashes. The King's son came to meet her, and took her by the hand and danced with her, and he
refused to stand up with any one else, so that he might not be
obliged to let go her hand; and when any one came to claim it he
answered, "She is my partner." And when the evening came she wanted to go home, but the
Prince said he would go with her to take care of her, for he wanted
to see where the beautiful maiden hved. But she escaped him, and
jumped up into the pigeon-house. Then the Prince waited until the
father came, and told him the strange maiden had jumped into the
pigeon-house. The father thought to himself, *Tt surely cannot be
Cinderella," and called for axes and hatchets, and had the pigeon- house cut down, but there was no one in it. And when they entered
the house there sat Cinderella in her dirty clothes among the cinders, and a little oil-lamp burnt dimly in the chinmey; for Cinderella had been very quick, and had jumped out of the pigeonhouse again, and had run to the hazel bush; and there she had
taken oflF her beautiful dress and had laid it on the grave, and the
bird had carried it away again, and then she had put on her little
gray kirtle again, and had sat down in the kitchen among the cin- ders.
The next day, when the festival began anew, and the parents and
step-sisters had gone to it, Cinderella went to the hazel bush and cried,
"Little tree, little tree, shake over me.
That silver and gold may come down and cover me."
84 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
Then the bird cast down a still more splendid dress than on the
day before. And when she appeared in it among the guests every
one was astonished at her beauty. The Prince had been waiting
until she came, and he took her hand and danced with her alone.
And when any one else came to invite her he said, "She is my
partner." And when the evening came she wanted to go home, and the
Prince followed her, for he wanted to see to what house she
belonged; but she broke away from him, and ran into the garden at
the back of the house. There stood a fine large tree, bearing splendid pears; she leapt as lightly as a squirrel among the branches, and the Prince did not know what had become of her. So he waited
until the father came, and then he told him that the strange maiden
had rushed from him, and that he thought she had gone up into the
pear tree. The father thought to himself, "It surely cannot be Cinderella," and called for an axe, and felled the tree, but there was no one in it. And when they went into the kitchen there sat Cinderella
among the cinders, as usual, for she had got down the other side of
the tree, and had taken back her beautiful clothes to the bird on
the hazel bush, and had put on her old gray Idrtle again.
On the third day, when the parents and the step-children had set
off, Cinderella went again to her mother's grave, and said to the tree,
"Little tree, little tree, shake over me.
That silver and gold may some dovm and cover me"
Then the bird cast down a dress, the hke of which had never
been seen for splendor and brilliancy, and slippers that were of
gold. And when she appeared in thl^ dress at the feast nobody knew
what to say for wonderment. The Prince danced with her alone,
and if any one else asked her he answered, "She is my partner." And when it was evening Cinderella wanted to go home, and the
Prince was about to go with her, when she ran past him so quickly
that he could not follow her. But he had laid a plan, and had
caused all the steps to be spread with pitch, so that as she rushed
down them the left shoe of the maiden remained sticking in it. The
Prince picked it up, and saw that it was of gold, and very small and
slender. The next morning he went to the father and told him that
none should be his bride save the one whose foot the golden shoe should fit.
Then the two sisters were very glad, because they had pretty
Cinderella 85
feet. The eldest went to her room to try on the shoe, and her
mother stood by. But she could not get her great toe into it, for the
shoe was too small; then her mother handed her a knife, and said,
"Cut the toe ofiF, for when you are Queen you wiU never have to go
on foot." So the girl cut her toe oflF, squeezed her foot into the shoe, concealed the pain, and went down to the Prince. Then he took her
vidth him on his horse as his bride, and rode oflF. They had to pass
by the grave, and there sat the two pigeons on the hazel bush, and
cried,
"There they go, there they go! There is blood on her shoe;
The shoe is too small,
—Not the right bride at alir
Then the Prince looked at her shoe, and saw the blood flowing.
And he turned his horse round and took the false bride home again,
saying she was not the right one, and that the other sister must try
on the shoe. So she went into her room to do so, and got her toes
comfortably in, but her heel was too large. Then her mother
handed her the knife, saying, "Cut a piece off yoiu: heel; when you
are Queen you will never have to go on foot." So the girl cut a piece off her heel, and thrust her foot into the
shoe, concealed the pain, and went down to the Prince, who took
his bride before him on his horse and rode off. When they passed
by the hazel bush the two pigeons sat there and cried,
"There they go, there they go! There is blood on her shoe;
The shoe is too small,
—Not the right bride at all!"
Then the Prince looked at her foot, and saw how the blood was
flowing from the shoe, and staining the white stocking. And he
turned his horse roimd and brought the false bride home again.
"This is not the right one," said he, "have you no other daughter?"
"No," said the man, "only my dead wiie left behind her a little
stunted Cinderella; it is impossible that she can be the bride." But
the King's son ordered her to be sent for, but the mother said, "Oh
no! she is much too dirty, I could not let her be seen." But he would have her fetched, and so Cinderella had to appear.
First she washed her face and hands qioite clean, and went in
and curtseyed to the Prince, who held out to her the golden shoe.
Then she sat down on a stool, drew her foot out of the heavy
86 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
wooden shoe, and slipped it into the golden one, which fitted it perfectly. And when she stood up, and the Prince looked in her face,
he knew again the beautiful maiden that had danced with him, and
he cried, "This is the right bridel" The step-mother and the two sisters were thunderstruck, and grew
pale with anger; but he put Cinderella before him on his horse and
rode off. And as they passed the hazel bush, the two white pigeons cried,
"There they go, there they got No blood on her shoe;
The shoe's not too small.
The right bride is she after all."
And when they had thus cried, they came flying after and perched
on Cinderella's shoulders, one on the right, the other on the left, and so remained.
And when her wedding with the Prince was appointed to be held
the false sisters came, hoping to curry favor, and to take part in the
festivities. So as the bridal procession went to the church, the eldest
walked on the right side and the younger on the left, and the pigeons picked out an eye of each of them. And as they returned the
elder was on the left side and the younger on the right, and the pigeons picked out the other eye of each of them. And so they were
condemned to go blind for the rest of their days because of their wickedness and falsehood.
Simeli Mountain
There weke once two brothers, the one rich, the other poor. The
rich one, however, gave nothing to the poor one, and he gained a
scanty living by trading in com, and often did so badly that he had
no bread for his wife and children. Once when he was wheeling a
barrow through the forest he saw, on one side of him, a great, bare,
naked-looking mountain, and as he had never seen it before, he stood still and stared at it with amazement.
While he was thus standing he saw twelve great, wild men coming towards him, and as he believed they were robbers he pushed
his barrow into the thicket, climbed up a tree, and waited to see
Simeli Mountain Sj
what would happen. The twelve men, however, went to the mountain and cried, "Semsi mountain, Semsi moimtain, open"; and im- mediately the barren mountain opened down the middle, and the
twelve went into it, and as soon as they were within, it shut. After a
short time, however, it opened again, and the men came forth carrying heavy sacks on their shoulders, and when they were all once
more in the daylight they said, "Semsi mountain, Semsi mountain, shut thyself; then the mountain closed together, and there was no
longer any entrance to be seen to it, and the twelve went away.
When they were quite out of sight the poor man got down from
the tree, and was curious to know what really was secretly hidden
in the mountain. So he went up to it and said, "Semsi moimtain,
Semsi mountain, open"; and the moimtain opened to him also. Then he went inside, and the whole mountain was a cavern full of silver
and gold, and behind lay great piles of pearls and sparkling jewels,
heaped up Hke com. The poor man hardly knew what to do, and
whether he might take any of these treasiu-es for himself or not; but
at last he filled his pockets with gold, but he left the pearls and precious stones where they were. When he came out again he also
said, "Semsi mountain, Semsi mountain, shut thyself"; and the moun- tain closed itself, and he went home with his barrow.
And now he had no more cause for anxiety, but could buy bread
for his wife and children with his gold, and wine into the bargain.
He Hved joyously and uprightly, gave help to the poor, and did
good to every one. When, however, the money came to an end he
went to his brother, borrowed a measure that held a bushel, and
brought himself some more, but did not touch any of the most valuable things. When for the third time he wanted to fetch something,
he again borrowed the measure of his brother. The rich man had,
however, long been envious of his brother's possessions, and of the handsome way of living which he had set on foot, and could not xm- derstand from whence the riches came, and what his brother
wanted with the measure. Then he thought of a cunning trick, and
covered the bottom of the measure with pitch, and when he got the
measure back a piece of money was sticking in it.
He went at once to his brother and asked him, "What hast thou
been measuring in the bushel measure?" "Com and barley," said the other. Then he showed him the piece of money, and threatened
that if he did not tell the truth he would accuse him before a court
of justice. The poor man then told him everything, just as it had
happened. The rich man, however, ordered his carriage to be made
ready, and drove away, resolved to use the opportunity better than
88 Grimm*s Complete Fairy Tales
his brother had done, and to bring back with him quite different treasures.
When he came to the mountain he cried, "Semsi mountain, Semsi
moimtain, open." The mountain opened, and he went inside it. There lay the treasures all before him, and for a long time he did
not know which to clutch at first. At length he loaded himself with
as many precious stones as he could carry. He wished to carry his
burden outside, but, as his heart and soul were entirely full of the
treasures, he had forgotten the name of the mountain, and cried,
"Simeli moimtain, Simeli mountain, open." That, however, was not the right name, and the mountain never stirred, but remained shut.
Then he was alarmed, but the longer he thought about it the more
his thoughts confused themselves, and his treasures were no more
of any use to him.
In the evening the mountain opened, and the twelve robbers
came in, and when they saw him they laughed, and cried out, "Bird, have we caught thee at lastl Didst thou think we had never noticed
that thou hadst been in here twice? We could not catch thee then;
this third time thou shalt not get out again!" Then he cried, *Tt was
not I, it was my brother," but let him beg for his life and say what he would, they cut his head off.
The Glass CofEn
Let no one ever say that a poor tailor cannot do great things and
win high honors; all that is needed is that he should go to the right
smithy, and what is of most consequence, that he should have good
luck. A civil, adroit tailor s apprentice once went out traveling, and
came into a great forest, and, as he did not know the way, he lost
himself. Night fell, and nothing was left for him to do, but to seek a
bed in this painful solitude. He might certainly have found a good
bed on the soft moss, but the fear of wild beasts let him have no
rest there, and at last he was forced to make up his mind to spend
the night in a tree. He sought out a high oak, climbed up to the top
of it, and thanked God that he had his goose with him, for otherwise the wind which blew over the top of the tree would have
carried him away.
After he had spent some hours in the darkness, not without fear
The Glass Coffin 89
and trembling, he saw at a very short distance the glimmer of a
light, and as he thought that a human habitation might be there,
where he would be better ofiE than on the branches of a tree, he got
carefully down and went towards the light. It guided him to a
small hut that was woven together of reeds and rushes. He knocked
boldly, the door opened, and by the light which came forth he saw
a little hoary old man who wore a coat made of bits of colored stuff
sewn together.
"Who are you, and what do you want?" asked the man in a
grumbling voice, "l am a poor tailor," he answered, "whom night has surprised here in the wilderness, and I earnestly beg you to
take me into your hut until morning." "Go your way," replied the
old man in a surly voice, "I will have nothing to do with rascals.
Seek shelter elsewhere." After these words he was about to shp into his hut again, but the tailor held him so tightly by the comer of his
coat, and pleaded so piteously, that the old man, who was not so illnatured as he wished to appear, was at last softened, and took him
into the hut with him where he gave him something to eat, and
then pointed out to him a very good bed in a comer.
The weary tailor needed no rocking; but slept sweetly till morning, but even then would not have thought of getting up, if he had
not been aroused by a great noise. A violent sound of screaming
and roaring forced its way through the thin walls of the hut. The
tailor, full of unwonted courage, jumped up, put his clothes on in
haste, and hurried out. Then close by the hut, he saw a great black
bull and a beautiful stag, which were just preparing for a violent
struggle. They rushed at each other with such extreme rage that the
ground shook with their trampKng, and the air resounded with
their cries. For a long time it was uncertain which of the two would
gain the victory; at length the stag thrust his horns into his adversary's body, whereupon the bull fell to the earth with a terrific roar, and was thoroughly despatched by a few strokes from the stag.
The tailor, who had watched the fight with astonishment, was
still standing there motionless, when the stag in full career bounded
up to him, and before he could escape, caught him up on his great
horns. He had not much time to collect his thoughts, for it went in
a swift race over stock and stone, mountain and valley, wood and
meadow. He held with both hands to the tops of the horns, and
resigned himself to his fate. It seemed to him, however, just as if he
were flying away. At length the stag stopped in front of a wall of
rock, and gently let the tailor down. The tailor, more dead than
alive, required a longer time than that to come to himself. When he
go GfimrrCs Complete Fairy Tales
had in some degree recovered, the stag, which had remained standing by him, pushed its horns with such force against a door which
was in the rock, that it sprang open. Flames of fire shot forth, after
which followed a great smoke, which hid the stag from his sight.
The tailor did not know what to do, or whither to turn, in order to
get out of this desert and back to human beings again. While he
was standing thus undecided, a voice sounded out of the rock,
which cried to him, "Enter without fear, no evil shall befall thee." He certainly hesitated, but driven by a mysterious force, he obeyed
the voice and went through the iron-door into a large spacious hall,
whose ceiling, walls and floor were made of shining polished square
stones, on each of which were cut letters which were unknown to
him. He looked at everything full of admiration, and was on the
point of going out again, when he once more heard the voice which
said to him, "Step on the stone which lies in the middle of the hall,
and great good fortune awaits thee." His courage had already grown so great that he obeyed the
order. The stone began to give way under his feet, and sank slowly
down into the depths. When it was once more firm, and the tailor
looked round, he found himself in a hall which in size resembled
the former. Here, however, there was more to look at and to admire. Hollow places were cut in the walls, in which stood vases of
transparent glass which were filled with colored spirit or with a
bluish vapor. On the floor of the hall two great glass chests stood
opposite to each other, which at once excited his curiosity. When he went to one of them he saw inside it a handsome structure like a
castle surroimded by farm-buildings, stables and bams, and a quantity of other good things. Everything was small, but exceedingly
carefully and delicately made, and seemed to be cut out by a dex- terous hand with the greatest exactitude.
He might not have turned away his eyes from the consideration
of this rarity for some time, if the voice had not once more made it- self heard. It ordered him to turn round and look at the glass chest
which was standing opposite. How his admiration increased when
he saw therein a maiden of the greatest beautyl She lay as if asleep,
and was wrapped in her long fair hair as in a precious mantle. Her
eyes were closely shut, but the brightness of her complexion and a
ribbon which her breathing moved to and fro, left no doubt that
she was alive.
The tailor was looking at the beauty with beating heart, when
she suddenly opened her eyes, and started up at the sight of him in
joyful terror. "Just Heavenl" cried she, "my deliverance is at handl
The Glass Coffin 91
Quick, quick, help me out of my prison; if you push back the bolt
of this glass coflBn, then I shall be free." The tailor obeyed without delay, and she immediately raised up the glass lid, came out and
hastened into the comer of the hall, where she covered herself with
a large cloak. Then she seated herself on a stone, ordered the young
man to come to her, and after she had imprinted a friendly kiss on
his lips, she said, "My long-desired deliverer, kind Heaven has guided you to me, and put an end to my sorrows. On the self-same
day when they end, shall your happiness begin. You are the husband chosen for me by Heaven, and you shall pass your life in unbroken joy, loved by me, and rich to overflowing in every earthly
possession. Seat yourself and Hsten to the story of my life:
"I am the daughter of a rich count. My parents died when I was still in my tender youth, and recommended me in their last will to
my elder brother, by whom I was brought up. We loved each other
so tenderly, and were so alike in our way of thinking and our incli- nations, that we both embraced the resolution never to marry, but
to stay together to the end of our Uves. In our house there was no
lack of company; neighbors and friends visited us often, and we
showed the greatest hospitality to every one. So it came to pass one
evening that a stranger came riding to our castle, and, under pretext of not being able to get on to the next place, begged for shelter
for the night. We granted his request with ready courtesy, and he
entertained us in the most agreeable manner during supper by con- versation intermingled with stories. My brother liked the stranger
so much that he begged him to spend a couple of days with us, to
which, after some hesitation, he consented. We did not rise from
table imtil late in the night, the stranger was shown to a room, and
I hastened, as I was tired, to lay my limbs in my soft bed.
"Hardly had I slept for a short time, when the sound of faint and delightful music awoke me. As I could not conceive from whence it
came, I wanted to summon my waiting-maid who slept in the next
room, but to my astonishment I found that speech was taken away
from me by an imknown force. I felt as if a mountain were weighing down my breast, and was imable to make the very slightest
sound. In the meantime, by the Hght of my night-lamp, I saw the
stranger enter my room through two doors which were fast bolted.
He came to me and said, that by magic arts which were at his command, he had caused the lovely music to sound in order to awaken
me, and that he now forced his way through all fastenings with the
intention of offering me his hand and heart. My repugnance to his
magic arts was, however, so great that I vouchsafed him no answer.
92 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
He remained for a time standing without moving, apparently with
the idea of waiting for a favorable decision, but as I continued to
keep silence, he angrily declared he would revenge himself and find
means to punish my pride, and left the room. I passed the night in
the greatest disquietude, and only feU asleep towards morning.
When I awoke, I hmried to my brother, but did not find him in his
room, and the attendants told me that he had ridden forth with the
stranger to the chase by daybreak.
"I at once suspected nothing good. I dressed myself quickly, or- dered my palfrey to be saddled, and accompanied only by one servant, rode full gallop to the forest. The servant fell with his horse,
and could not follow me, for the horse had broken its foot. I pursued my way without halting, and in a few minutes I saw the
stranger coming towards me vwth a beautiful stag which he led by
a cord. I asked him where he had left my brother, and how he had
come by this stag, out of whose great eyes I saw tears flowing. Instead of answering me, he began to laugh loudly. I fell into a great
rage at this, pulled out a pistol and discharged it at the monster;
but the ball rebounded from his breast and went into my horse's head. I fell to the ground, and the stranger muttered some words
which deprived me of consciousness.
"When I came to my senses again I found myself in this under- ground cave in a glass coflBn. The magician appeared once again,
and said he had changed my brother into a stag, my castle wdth all
that belonged to it, diminished in size by his arts, he had shut up in
the other glass chest, and my people, who were all turned into
smoke, he had confined in glass bottles. He told me that if I would
now comply v^dth his wish, it was an easy thing for him to put everything back in its former state, as he had nothing to do but open
the vessels, and everything would return once more to its natural form. I answered him as little as I had done the first time. He
vanished and left me in my prison, in which a deep sleep came on
me. Among the visions which passed before my eyes, that was the
most comforting in which a young man came and set me free, and
when I opened my eyes today I saw you, and beheld my dream
fulfilled. Help me to accomplish the other things which happened
in those visions. The first is that we Hft the glass chest in which my
castle is enclosed, on to that broad stone." As soon as the stone was laden, it began to rise up on high v^dth
the maiden and the young man, and mounted through the opening
of the ceiling into the upper hall, from whence they then could easily reach the open air. Here the maiden opened the lid, and it was
Rapunzel 93
marvelous to behold how the castle, the houses, and the farm buildings which were enclosed, stretched themselves out and grew to
their natural size with the greatest rapidity. After this, the maiden
and the tailor returned to the cave beneath the earth, and had the
vessels which were filled with smoke carried up by the stone. The
maiden had scarcely opened the bottles when the blue smoke
rushed out and changed itself into living men, in whom she recognized her servants and her people. Her joy was still more increased
when her brother, who had killed the magician in the form of a
buU, came out of the forest towards them in his human form. And
on the self-same day the maiden, in accordance vidth her promise, gave her hand at the altar to the lucky tailor.
Rapunzel
There once lived a man and his wife who had long wished for a
child, but in vain. Now there was at the back of their house a little
window which overlooked a beautiful garden full of the finest vegetables and flowers; but there was a high wall all round it, and no
one ventmred into it, for it belonged to a witch of great might, and
of whom all the world was afraid. One day when the vnfe was
standing at the window, and looking into the garden, she saw a bed
fiUed with the finest rampion; and it looked so fresh and green that
she began to wish for some; and at length she longed for it greatly.
This went on for days, and as she knew she could not get the rampion, she pined away, and grew pale and miserable.
Then the man was uneasy, and asked, "What is the matter, dear
wife?" "Oh," answered she, "I shall die unless I can have some of that rampion to eat that grows in the garden at the back of our
house." The man, who loved her very much, thought to himself,
"Rather than lose my wife I will get some rampion, cost what it
will."
So in the twilight he climbed over the wall into the witch's gar- den, plucked hastily a handful of rampion and brought it to his
wife. She made a salad of it at once, and ate of it to her heart's con- tent. But she liked it so much, and it tasted so good, that the next
day she longed for it thrice as much as she had done before; if she
was to have any rest the man must climb over the wall once more.
94 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
So he went in the twilight again; and as he was climbing back, he
saw, all at once, the witch standing before him, and was terribly
frightened, as she cried, with angry eyes, "How dare you climb over into my garden like a thief, and steal my rampionl It shall be
the worse for youl"
"Oh," answered he, "be merciful rather than just; I have only done it through necessity; for my wife saw your rampion out of the
window, and became possessed with so great a longing that she
would have died if she coidd not have had some to eat."
Then the witch said, "If it is all as you say, you may have as much rampion as you like, on one condition— the child that will
come into the world must be given to me. It shall go well with the
child, and I will care for it like a mother." In his distress of mind the man promised everything; and when
the time came when the child was bom the witch appeared, and,
giving the child the name of Rapunzel (which is the same as rampion), she took it away with her.
Rapunzel was the most beautiful child in the world. When she
was twelve years old the witch shut her up in a tower in the midst
of a wood, and it had neither steps nor door, only a small v/indow
above. When the witch wished to be let in, she would stand below
and would cry, "Rapimzel, Rapunzell Let down your hair!" Rapunzel had beautiful long hair that shone like gold. When she
heard the voice of the v^dtch she would undo the fastening of the
upper window, unbind the plaits of her hair, and let it down
twenty ells below, and the witch would chmb up by it.
After they had lived thus a few years it happened that as the
King's son was riding through the wood, he came to the tower; and as he drew near he heard a voice singing so sweetly that he stood
still and listened. It was Rapimzel in her loneliness trying to pass
away the time with sweet songs. The King's son wished to go in to her, and sought to find a door in the tower, but there was none. So
he rode home, but the song had entered into his heart, and every
day he went into the wood and Hstened to it.
Once, as he was standing there under a tree, he saw the witch
come up, and listened while she called out, "Oh Rapunzel, Rapunzell Let down your hair." Then he saw how Rapunzel let down her long tresses, and how
the witch climbed up by them and went in to her, and he said to
himself, "Since that is the ladder, I will climb it, and seek my fortune." And the next day, as soon as it began to grow dusk, he went
to the tower and cried, "Oh Rapimzel, Rapunzell Let down your
Rapunzel 95
hair." And she let down her hair, and the King's son climbed up by it.
Rapunzel was greatly terrified when she saw that a man had
come in to her, for she had never seen one before; but the King's son began speaking so kindly to her, and told how her singing had
entered into his heart, so that he could have no peace imtil he had
seen her herself. Then Rapunzel forgot her terror, and when he
asked her to take him for her husband, and she saw that he was
young and beautiful, she thought to herself, "I certainly hke him
much better than old mother Gothel," and she put her hand into his
hand, saying, "I would willingly go with you, but I do not know how I shall get out. When you come, bring each time a silken rope,
and I will make a ladder, and when it is quite ready I will get
down by it out of the tower, and you shall take me away on your
horse." They agreed that he should come to her every evening, as the old
woman came in the day-time. So the witch knew nothing of all this
until once Rapunzel said to her unwittingly, "Mother Gothel, how
is it that you climb up here so slowly, and the Bang's son is with me in a moment?"
"O wicked child," cried the witch, "what is this I hearl I thought
I had hidden you from all the world, and you have betrayed mel" In her anger she seized Rapunzel by her beautiful hair, struck
her several times with her left hand, and then grasping a pair of
shears in her right— snip, snap— the beautiful locks lay on the
ground. And she was so hard-hearted that she took Rapunzel and
put her in a waste and desert place, where she lived in great woe
and misery.
The same day on which she took Rapunzel away she went back
to the tower in the evening and made fast the severed locks of hair
to the window-hasp, and the King's son came and cried, "Rapimzel,
Rapunzell Let down your hair."
Then she let the hair down, and the King's son climbed up, but instead of his dearest Rapunzel he foimd the witch looking at him
with wicked, glittering eyes.
"Aha!" cried she, mocking him, "you came for your darling, but the sweet bird sits no longer in the nest, and sings no more; the cat
has got her, and will scratch out your eyes as well! Rapunzel is lost
to you; you will see her no more."
The King's son was beside himself with grief, and in his agony he sprang from the tower; he escaped with life, but the thorns on
96 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
which he fell put out his eyes. Then he wandered blind through the
wood, eating nothing but roots and berries, and doing nothing but
lament and weep for the loss of his dearest wife.
So he wandered several years in misery untQ at last he came to
the desert place where Rapunzel lived with her twin-children that she had borne, a boy and a girl. At first he heard a voice that he
thought he knew, and when he reached the place from which it
seemed to come Rapunzel knew him, and fell on his neck and
wept. And when her tears touched his eyes they became clear again, and he could see with them as well as ever.
Then he took her to his kingdom, where he was received with
great joy, and there they lived long and happily.
The Sleeping Beauty
In times past there Hved a King and Queen, who said to each
other every day of their lives, "Would that we had a child!" and yet they had none. But it happened once that when the Queen was
bathing, there came a frog out of the water, and he squatted on the
ground, and said to her, "Thy wish shall be fulfilled; before a year
has gone by, thou shalt bring a daughter into the world." And as the frog foretold, so it happened; and the Queen bore a
daughter so beautiful that the King could not contain himself for
joy, and he ordained a great feast. Not only did he bid to it his rela- tions, friends, and acquaintances, but also the wise women, tbat
they might be kind and favorable to the child. There were thirteen
of them in his kingdom, but as he had only provided twelve golden
plates for them to eat from, one of them had to be left out
However, the feast was celebrated with all splendor; and as it
drew to an end, the wise women stood forward to present to the
child their wonderful gifts: one bestowed virtue, one beauty, a
third riches, and so on, whatever there is in the world to wish for.
And when eleven of them had said their say, in came the uninvited
thirteenth, burning to revenge herself, and without greeting or respect, she cried with a loud voice, "In the fifteenth year of her age the Princess shall prick herself with a spindle and shall fall down
dead." And without speaking one more word she turned away and left the hall.
The Sleeping Beauty 97
Every one was terrified at her saying, when the twelfth came forward, for she had not yet bestowed her gift, and though she could
not do away with the evil prophecy, yet she could soften it, so she
said, *The Princess shall not die, but fall into a deep sleep for a
hundred years." Now the King, being desirous of saving his child even from this
misfortune, gave commandment that all the spindles in his kingdom
should be burnt up.
The maiden grew up, adorned with all the gifts of the wise
women; and she was so lovely, modest, sweet, and kind and clever,
that no one who saw her could help loving her.
It happened one day, she being already fifteen years old, that the
King and Queen rode abroad; and the maiden was left behind
alone in the castle. She wandered about into all the nooks and
comers, and into all the chambers and parlors, as the fancy took
her, till at last she came to an old tower. She climbed the narrow
winding stair which led to a little door, with a rusty key sticking
out of the lock; she turned the key, and the door opened, and there
in the little room sat an old woman with a spindle, diligently spin- ning her flax.
"Good day, mother," said the Princess, "what are you doing?" "I
am spinning," answered the old woman, nodding her head. "What
thing is that that twists round so briskly?" asked the maiden, and taking the spindle into her hand she began to spin; but no sooner
had she touched it than the evil prophecy was fulfilled, and she
pricked her finger with it. In that very moment she fell back upon
the bed that stood there, and lay in a deep sleep, and this sleep fell
upon the whole castle. The King and Queen, who had returned and
were in the great hall, fell fast asleep, and with them the whole
court. The horses in their stalls, the dogs in the yard, the pigeons on
the roof, the flies on the wall, the very fire that flickered on the
hearth, became still, and slept like the rest; and the meat on the
spit ceased roasting, and the cook, who was going to puU the sculHon's hair for some mistake he had made, let him go, and went to sleep. And the wind ceased, and not a leaf fell from the trees about the castle.
Then round about that place there grew a hedge of thorns
thicker every year, until at last the whole castle was hidden from
view, and nothing of it could be seen but the vane on the roof. And
a rumor went abroad in aU that country of the beautiful sleeping
Rosamond, for so was the Princess called; and from time to time
many Kings* sons came and tried to force their way through the
gS Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
hedge; but it was impossible for them to do so, for the thorns held
fast together like strong hands, and the young men were caught by
them, and not being able to get free, there died a lamentable death.
Many a long year afterwards there came a King's son into that country, and heard an old man tell how there should be a castle
standing behind the hedge of thorns, and that there a beautiful
enchanted Princess named Rosamond had slept for a hundred
years, and with her the King and Queen, and the whole court. The
old man had been told by his grandfather that many Kings' sons had sought to pass the thorn-hedge, but had been caught and
pierced by the thorns, and had died a miserable death. Then said
the young man, "Nevertheless, I do not fear to try; I shall win
through and see the lovely Rosamond." The good old msm tried to dissuade him, but he would not listen to his words.
For now the hundred years were at an end, and the day had
come when Rosamond should be awakened. When the Prince drew
near the hedge of thorns, it was changed into a hedge of beautiful
large flowers, which parted and bent aside to let him pass, and then
closed behind him in a thick hedge. When he reached the castleyard, he saw the horses and brindled hunting-dogs lying asleep,
and on the roof the pigeons were sitting with their heads under
their wings. And when he came indoors, the flies on the wall were
asleep, the cook in the Idtchen had his hand upHfted to strike the
scuUion, and the kitchenmaid had the black fowl on her lap ready
to pluck. Then he mounted higher, and saw in the hall the whole
court lying asleep, and above them, on their thrones, slept the King
and the Queen. And still he went farther, and all was so quiet that
he could hear his own breathing; and at last he came to the tower,
and went up the winding stair, and opened the door of the little
room where Rosamond lay.
And when he saw her looking so lovely in her sleep, he could not
turn away his eyes; and presently he stooped and Idssed her, and
she awaked, and opened her eyes, and looked very kindly on him.
And she rose, and they went forth together, the King and the
Queen and whole court waked up, and gazed on each other with
great eyes of wonderment. And the horses in the yard got up and
shook themselves, the hounds sprang up and wagged their tails, the
pigeons on the roof drew their heads from under their wings,
looked round, and flew into the field, the flies on the wall crept on a
Httle farther, the kitchen fire leapt up and blazed, and cooked the
meat, the joint on the spit began to roast, the cook gave the scullion
Old Binhrank 99
such a box on the ear that he roared out, and the maid went on
plucking the fowl.
Then the wedding of the Prince and Rosamond was held with all
splendor, and they lived very happily together untQ their lives' end.
Old Rinkrank
Thebe was once upon a time a King who had a daughter, and he
caused a glass-mountain to be made, and said that whosoever could
cross to the other side of it without falling should have his daughter
to wife. Then there was one who loved the King's daughter, and he
asked the King if he might have her. Tes,** said the King; "if you
can cross the mountain without falling, you shall have her." And the Princess said she would go over it with him, and would hold him if he were about to fall.
So they set out together to go over it, and when they were halfway up the Princess sHpped and fell, and the glass-mountain opened and shut her up inside it, and her betrothed could not see
where she had gone, for the mountain closed unmediately. Then he
wept and lamented much, and the King was miserable too, and had
the mountain broken open where she had been lost, and thought he
would be able to get her out again, but they could not find the
place into which she had fallen.
Meantime the King's daughter had fallen quite deep down into the earth into a great cave. An old fellow with a very long gray
beard came to meet her, and told her that if she would be his servant and do everything he bade her, she might live; if not, he
would kill her. So she did all he bade her. In the mornings he took
his ladder out of his pocket, and set it up against the moimtain and
climbed to the top by its help, and then he drew up the ladder
after him. The Princess had to cook his dinner, make his bed, and
do all his work, and when he came home again he always brought
with him a heap of gold and silver. When she had lived with him
for many years, and had grown quite old, he called her Mother
Mansrot, and she had to call him Old Rinkrank. Then once when
he was out, and she had made his bed and washed his dishes, she
shut the doors and windows aU fast, and there was one little window
through which the light shone in, and this she left open.
lOO Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
When Old Rinkrank came home, he knocked at his door, and
cried, "Mother Mansrot, open the door for me." 'TSfo," said she,
"Old Rinkrank, I will not open the door for you." Then he said,
"Here stand I, poor Rinkrank, On my seventeen long shanks.
On my weary, worn-out foot,
Wash my dishes. Mother Mansrot."
"l have washed your dishes already," said she. Then again he said,
"Here stand I, poor Rinkrank, On my seventeen long shanks.
On my weary, worn-out foot,
Make me my bed. Mother Mansrot."
*1 have made your bed already," said she. Then again he said,
"Here stand I, poor Rinkrank, On my seventeen long shanks.
On my weary, worn-out foot.
Open the door. Mother Mansrot."
Then he ran all round his house, and saw that the little window
was open, and thought, "I will look in and see what she can be
about, and why she will not open the door for me." He tried to peep in, but could not get his head through because of his long
beard. So he first put his beard through the open window, but just
as he had got it through. Mother Mansrot came by and pulled the
window down with a cord which she had tied to it, and his beard
was shut fast in it. Then he began to cry most piteously, for it hurt
him very much, and to entreat her to release him again. But she
said not untQ he gave her the ladder with which he ascended the
mountain. Then, whether he woiild or not, he had to tell her
where the ladder was. And she fastened a very long ribbon to the
window, and then she set up the ladder, and ascended the mountain, and when she was at the top of it she opened the window.
She went to her father, and told him all that had happened to
her. The King rejoiced greatly, and her betrothed was still there,
and they went and dug up the mountain, and found Old Rinkrank
inside it with all his gold and silver. Then the King had Old
Rinkrank put to death, and took all his gold and silver. The Piincess married her betrothed, and lived right happily in great luxury
and joy.
Hansel and Gretel
Near a great forest there lived a poor woodcutter and his wife and
his two children; the boy's name was Hansel and the girl's Gretel. They had very little to bite or to sup, and once, when there was
^eat dearth in the land, the man could not even gain the daily bread.
As he lay in bed one night thinking of this, and tmiiing and tossing, he sighed heavily, and said to his wife, *What will become of us? We cannot even feed our children; there is nothing left for ourselves."
"I will tell you what, husband," answered the wife; "we will take the children early in the morning into the forest, where it is
thickest; we will make them a fire, and we will give each of them a
piece of bread, then we will go to our work and leave them alone;
they will never find the way home again, and we shall be quit of
them."
"No, wife," said the man, "1 cannot do that; I cannot find in my heart to take my children into the forest and to leave them there
alone; the wild animals would soon come and devour them."
"O you fool," said she, "then we will aU foin: starve; you had better get the cofifins ready"— and she left him no peace until he con- sented.
"But I really pity the poor children," said the man. The two children had not been able to sleep for hunger, and had
heard what their step-mother had said to their father. Gretel wept
bitterly, and said to Hansel, "It is all over with us." "Do be quiet,
Gretel," said Hansel, "and do not fret. I will manage something." And when the parents had gone to sleep he got up, put on his little coat, opened the back door, and slipped out. The moon was
shining brightly, and the white flints that lay in front of the house
glistened like pieces of silver. Hansel stooped and filled the little
pocket of his coat as full as it would hold. Then he went back
again, and said to Gretel, "Be easy, dear little sister, and go to sleep
quietly; God wiU not forsake us," and laid himself down again in his bed.
When the day was breaking, and before the sim had risen, the
102 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
wife came and awakened the two children, saying, "Get up, you
lazy bones; we are going into the forest to cut wood."
Then she gave each of them a piece of bread, and said, "That is for dinner, and you must not eat it before then, for you will get no
more." Gretel carried the bread under her apron, for Hansel had his
pockets full of the flints. Then they set off all together on their way
to the forest. When they had gone a little way Hansel stood still
and looked back towards the house, and this he did again and
again, till his father said to him, "Hansel, what are you looking at?
Take care not to forget your legs."
"O father," said Hansel, "I am looking at my Httle white kitten,
who is sitting up on the roof to bid me good-bye."
"You young fool," said the woman, "that is not your Idtten, but
the sunshine on the chimney pot." Of course Hansel had not been looking at his kitten, but had
been taking every now and then a flint from his pocket and dropping it on the road.
When they reached the middle of the forest the father told the
children to collect wood to make a fire to keep them warm; and
Hansel and Gretel gathered brushwood enough for a little mountain; and it was set on fire, and when the flame was burning quite
high the v^e said, "Now He dowm by the fire and rest yourselves, you children, and we vwU go and cut wood; and when we are ready
we will come and fetch you." So Hansel and Gretel sat by the fire, and at noon they each ate
their pieces of bread. They thought their father was in the wood all
the time, as they seemed to hear the strokes of the axe, but really it
was only a dry branch hanging to a withered tree that the wind
moved to and fro. So when they had stayed there a long time their
eyelids closed v^dth weariness, and they fell fast asleep.
When at last they woke it was night, and Gretel began to cry,
and said, "How shall we ever get out of this wood?" But Hansel
comforted her, saying, "Wait a little while longer, imtil the moon
rises, and then we can easily find the way home." And when the full moon got up Hansel took his little sister by the
hand, and followed the way where the flint stones shone like silver,
and showed them the road. They walked on the whole night
through, and at the break of day they came to their father s house.
They knocked at the door, and when the wife opened it and saw it
was Hansel and Gretel she said, "You naughty children, why did you sleep so long in the wood? We thought you were never coming
Hansel and Gretel 103
home againr But the father was glad, for it had gone to his heart to leave them both in the woods alone.
Not very long after that there was again great scarcity in those
parts, and the children heard their mother say at night in bed to
their father, "Everything is finished up; we have only half a loaf, and after that the tale comes to an end. The children must be oflF;
we will take them farther into the wood this time, so that they shall
not be able to find the way back again; there is no other way to
manage."
The man felt sad at heart, and he thought, *Tt would be better to
share one's last morsel with one's children." But the wife would lis- ten to nothing that he said, but scolded and reproached him. He
who says A must say B too, and when a man has given in once he has to do it a second time.
But the children were not asleep, and had heard all the talk.
When the parents had gone to sleep Hansel got up to go out and
get more flint stones, as he did before, but the wife had locked the
door, and Hansel could not get out; but he comforted his little
sister, and said, "Don't cry, Gretel, and go to sleep quietly, and
God wiU help us." Early the next morning the wife came and pulled the children
out of bed. She gave them each a little piece of bread— less than be- fore; and on the way to the wood Hansel crumbled the bread in his
pocket, and often stopped to throw a crumb on the ground.
"Hansel, what are you stopping behind and staring for?" said the father.
*1 am looking at my little pigeon sitting on the roof, to say goodbye to me," answered Hansel.
"You fool," said the wife, "that is no pigeon, but the morning srm
shining on the chimney pots." Hansel went on as before, and strewed bread crumbs all along the road.
The woman led the children far into the wood, where they had
never been before in aU their lives. And agtiin there was a large fire
made, and the mother said, "Sit still there, you children, and when you are tired you can go to sleep; we are going into the forest to
cut wood, and in the evening, when we are ready to go home we
will come and fetch you." So when noon came Gretel shared her bread with Hansel, who
had strewed his along the road. Then they went to sleep, and the
evening passed, and no one came for the poor children. When they
awoke it was dark night, and Hansel comforted his Httle sister, and
104 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
said, "Wait a little, Gretel, until the moon gets up, then we shall be able to see the way home by the crumbs of bread that I have scattered along it." So when the moon rose they got up, but they could jBnd no
crumbs of bread, for the birds of the woods and of the fields had
come and picked them up. Hansel thought they might find the way
all the same, but they could not. They went on all that night, and
the next day from the morning until the evening, but they could not
find the way out of the wood, and they were very hungry, for they
had nothing to eat but the few berries they could pick up. And
when they were so tired that they could no longer drag themselves
along, they lay down under a tree and fell asleep.
It was now the third morning since they had left their father s
house. They were always trying to get back to it, but instead of that
they only found themselves farther in the wood, and if help had not
soon come they would have starved. About noon they saw a pretty
snow-white bird sitting on a bough, and singing so sweetly that
they stopped to listen. And when he had finished the bird spread
his wings and flew before them, and they followed after him until
they came to a little house, and the bird perched on the roof, and
when they came nearer they saw that the house was built of bread,
and roofed with cakes, and the window was of transparent sugar.
"We will have some of this," said Hansel, "and make a fine meal. I will eat a piece of the roof, Gretel, and you can have some of the
window— that will taste sweet." So Hansel reached up and broke off a bit of the roof, just to see
how it tasted, and Gretel stood by the window and gnawed at it.
Then they heard a thin voice call out from inside,
"Nibble, nibble, like a mouse,
Who is nibbling at my house?"
And the children answered,
"Never mind.
It is the wind"
And they went on eating, never disturbing themselves. Hansel, who
found that the roof tasted very nice, took down a great piece of it,
and Gretel pulled out a large round window-pane, and sat her down
and began upon it. Then the door opened, and an aged woman
came out, leaning upon a crutch. Hansel and Gretel felt very frightened, and let fall what they had in dieir hands. The old woman,
however, nodded her head, and said, "Ah, my dear children, how
Hansel and Gretel 105
come you here? You must come indoors and stay with me, you will
be no trouble."
So she took them each by the hand, and led them into her little
house. And there they found a good meal laid out, of milk and
pancakes, with sugar, apples, and nuts. After that she showed them
two little white beds, and Hansel and Gretel laid themselves down
on them, and thought they were in heaven.
The old woman, although her behavior was so kind, was a
wicked witch, who lay in wait for children, and had built the little
house on purpose to entice them. When they were once inside she
used to kill them, cook them, and eat them, and then it was a feastday with her. The witch's eyes were red, and she could not see very far, but she had a keen scent, hke the beasts, and knew very well when human creatures were near. When she knew that Hansel and
Gretel were coming, she gave a spiteful laugh, and said triimiphantly, "I have them, and they shall not escape mel" Early in the morning, before the children were awake, she got up
to look at them, and as they lay sleeping so peacefully with round
rosy cheeks, she said to herself, "What a fine feast I shall havel" Then she grasped Hansel with her withered hand, and led him
into a little stable, and shut him up behind a grating; and call and
scream as he might, it was no good. Then she went back to Gretel
and shook her, crying, "Get up, lazy bones; fetch water, and cook something nice for your brother; he is outside in the stable, and
must be fattened up. And when he is fat enough I will eat him." Gretel began to weep bitterly, but it was no use, she had to do what the wicked witch bade her.
And so the best Idnd of victuals was cooked for poor Hansel,
while Gretel got nothing but crab-shells. Each morning the old
woman visited the little stable, and cried, "Hansel, stretch out yoiu:
finger, that I may tell if you will soon be fat enough." Hansel, however, used to hold out a Httle bone, and the old
woman, who had weak eyes, could not see what it was, and supposing it to be Hansel's finger, wondered very much that it was not getting fatter. When four weeks had passed and Hansel seemed to
remain so thin, she lost patience and could wait no longer.
"Now then, Gretel," cried she to the little girl; "be quick and draw water; be Hansel fat or be he lean, tomorrow I must kill and
cook him." Oh what a grief for the poor little sister to have to fetch water,
and how the tears flowed down over her cheeks 1 "Dear God, pray
io6 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
help us!" cried she; "if we had been devoured by wild beasts in the
wood at least we should have died together."
"Spare me your lamentations," said the old woman; "they are of
no avail." Early next morning Gretel had to get up, make the fire, and fill
the kettle. "First we will do the baking," said the old woman; "I
have heated the oven aheady, and kneaded the dough." She pushed poor Gretel towards the oven, out of which the
flames were already shining. "Creep in," said the witch, "and see if it is properly hot, so that the bread may be baked." And Gretel once in, she meant to shut the door upon her and let
her be baked, and then she would have eaten her. But Gretel perceived her intention, and said, "1 don't know how to do it; how
shall I get in?"
"Stupid goose," said the old woman, "the opening is big enough,
do you see? I could get in myself!" and she stooped down and put
her head in the oven's mouth. Then Gretel gave her a push, so that she went in farther, and she shut the iron door upon her, and put
up the bar. Oh how frightfully she howled! But Gretel ran away,
and left the wicked witch to bum miserably. Gretel went straight to
Hansel, opened the stable-door, and cried, "Hansel, we are free!
the old witch is dead!" Then out flew Hansel like a bird from its cage as soon as the door
is opened. How rejoiced they both were! How they fell each on the
other's neck and danced about, and kissed each other! And as they
had nothing more to fear they went over all the old witch's house, and in every comer there stood chests of pearls and precious stones.
"This is something better than flint stones," said Hansel, as he filled his pockets; and Gretel, thinking she also would like to carry
something home with her, filled her apron full.
"Now, away we go," said Hansel— "if we only can get out of the witch's wood." When they had joiuneyed a few hours they came to a great piece
of water. "We can never get across this," said Hansel, "I see no
stepping-stones and no bridge." "And there is no boat either," said Gretel; "but here comes a white duck; if I ask her she will help us
over." So she cried,
"Duck, duck, here we stand. Hansel and Gretel, on the land.
Stepping-stones and bridge we lack.
Carry us over on your nice white back"
The Straw, the Coal, and the Bean 107
And the duck came accordingly, and Hansel got upon her and
told his sister to come too. "No," answered Gretel, "that would be
too hard upon the duck; we can go separately, one after the other." And that was how it was managed, and after that they went on
happily, until they came to the wood, and the way grew more and
more familiar, till at last they saw in the distance their father's house. Then they ran till they came up to it, rushed in at the door,
and fell on their father's neck. The man had not had a quiet hour since he left his children in the wood; but the wife was dead. And
when Gretel opened her apron the pearls and precious stones were
scattered all over the room, and Hansel took one handful after another out of his pocket. Then was all care at an end, and they lived
in great joy together.
Sing every one.
My story is done. And look! round the house
There runs a little mouse.
He that can catch her before she scampers in
May make himself a fur-cap out of her skin.
The Straw, the Coal, and the Bean
There lived in a certain village a poor old woman who had collected a mess of beans, and was going to cook them. So she made a
fire on her hearth, and, in order to make it bmm better, she put in a
handful of straw. When the beans began to bubble in the pot, one of
them fell out and lay, never noticed, near a straw which was already
there; soon a red-hot coal jumped out of the fire and joined the
pair.
The straw began first, and said, "Dear friends, how do you come
here?" The coal answered, "I jumped out of the fire by great good luck, or I should certainly have met with my death. I should have
been burned to ashes." The bean said, "I too have come out of it with a whole skin, but if the old woman had kept me in the pot I
should have been cooked into a soft mass like my comrades."
"Nor should I have met with a better fate," said the straw; "the old woman has turned my brothers into fire and smoke, sixty of
io8 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
them she took up at once and deprived of life. Very luckily I managed to slip through her fingers."
*What had we better do now?" said the coal. "1 think," answered
the bean, "that as we have been so lucky as to escape with our Hves, we will join in good fellowship together, and, lest any more
bad fortune should happen to us here, we vnll go abroad into foreign lands." The proposal pleased the two others, and forthwith they started
on their travels. Soon they came to a little brook, and as there was
no stepping-stone, and no bridge, they could not tell how they were
to get to the other side. The straw was struck with a good idea, and
said, "I will lay myself across, so that you can go over me as if I
were a bridgel" So the straw stretched himself from one bank to the other, and
the coal, who was of an ardent nature, quickly trotted up to go over
the new-made bridge. When, however, she reached the middle, and
heard the water rushing past beneath her, she was struck with terror, and stopped, and could get no farther. So the straw began to
get burnt, broke in two pieces, and fell in the brook; and the coal
slipped down, hissing as she touched the water, and gave up the
ghost. The bean, who had prudently remained behind on the bank,
could not help laughing at the sight, and not being able to contain
herself, went on laughing so excessively that she burst. And now
would she certainly have been undone for ever, i£ a tailor on his
travels had not by good luck stopped to rest himself by the brook.
As he had a compassionate heart, he took out needle and thread
and stitched her together again. The bean thanked him in the most
elegant manner, but as he had sewn her up with black stitches, all beans since then have a black seam.
The Death of the Hen
Once on a time the cock and the hen went to the nut mountain,
and they agreed beforehand that whichever of them should find a
nut was to divide it with the other. Now the hen found a great big
nut, but said nothing about it, and was going to eat it all alone, but
the kernel was such a fat one that she could not swallow it down,
The Death of the Hen 109
and it stuck in her throat, so that she was afraid she should choke.
"Cock!" cried she, "run as fast as you can and fetch me some water, or I shall choke!"
So the cock ran as fast as he could to the brook, and said, "Brook, give me some water, the hen is up yonder choking with a big nut
stuck in her throat." But the brook answered, 'Tirst run to the bride and ask her for some red silk."
So the cock ran to the bride and said, "Bride, give me some red silk; the brook wants me to give him some red silk; I want him to
give me some water, for the hen lies yonder choking with a big nut
stuck in her throat."
But the bride answered, "First go and fetch me my garland that
hangs on a wlUow." And the cock ran to the willow and puUed the garland from the bough and brought it to the bride, and the bride
gave him red silk, and he brought it to the brook, and the brook
gave him water. So then the cock brought the water to the hen, but
alas, it was too late; the hen had choked in the meanwhile, and lay
there dead. And the cock was so grieved that he cried aloud, and
aU the beasts came and lamented for the hen; and six mice built a
little wagon on which to carry the poor hen to her grave, and when
it was ready they harnessed themselves to it, and the cock drove.
On the way they met the fox. "Halloa, cock," cried he, "where
are you oflF to?" "To bury my hen," answered the cock. "Can I
come too?" said the fox. "Yes, if you follow behind," said the cock. So the fox followed behind and he was soon joined by the wolf,
the bear, the stag, the lion, and all the beasts in the wood. And the
procession went on till they came to a brook.
"How shall we get over?" said the cock. Now in the brook there
was a straw, and he said, "I will lay myself across, so that you may
pass over on me." But when the six mice had got upon this bridge, the straw slipped and fell into the water and they all tumbled in and
were drowned. So they were as badly off as ever, when a coal came
up and said he would lay himself across and they might pass over
him; but no sooner had he touched the water than he hissed, went
out, and was dead. A stone, seeing this, was touched with pity, and,
wishing to help the cock, he laid himself across the stream. And the
cock drew the wagon with the dead hen in it safely to the other
side, and then began to draw the others who followed behind
across too, but it was too much for him, the wagon turned over, and
all tumbled into the water one on the top of another, and were drowned.
So the cock was left all alone with the dead hen, and he dug a
no Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
grave and laid her in it, and he raised a mound above her, and sat
himself down and lamented so sore that at last he died. And so they
were all dead together.
The Rabbit's Bride
There was once a woman who lived with her daughter in a beautiful cabbage-garden; and there came a rabbit and ate up all the cabbages. At last said the woman to her daughter, "Go into the garden, and drive out the rabbit."
"Shoo! shoo!" said the maiden; "don't eat up all our cabbages,
little rabbit!" "Come, maiden," said the rabbit, "sit on my tail and
go with me to my rabbit-hutch." But the maiden would not. Another day, back came the rabbit, and ate away at the cabbages, until the woman said to her daughter, "Go into the garden,
and drive away the rabbit."
"Shoo! shoo!" said the maiden; "don't eat up all our cabbages,
little rabbit!" "Come, maiden," said the rabbit, "sit on my tail and
go with me to my rabbit-hutch." But the maiden would not. Again, a third time back came the rabbit, and ate away at the
cabbages, until the woman said to her daughter, "Go into the garden, and drive away the rabbit."
"Shoo! shoo!" said the maiden; "don't eat up all our cabbages,
little rabbit!" "Come, maiden," said the rabbit, "sit on my tail and
go with me to my rabbit-hutch." And then the girl seated herself on
the rabbit's tail, and the rabbit took her to his hutch.
"Now," said he, "set to work and cook some bran and cabbage; I
am going to bid the wedding guests." And soon they were all col- lected. Would you like to know who they were? Well, I can only
tell you what was told to me. All the hares came, and the crow
who was to be the parson to marry them, and the fox for the clerk,
and the altar was under the rainbow. But the maiden was sad, because she was so lonely.
"Get up! get up!" said the rabbit, "the wedding folk are all
merry." But the bride wept and said nothing, and the rabbit went
away, but very soon came back again. "Get up! get up!" said he,
"the weddinc folk are waiting." But the bride said nothing, and the rabbit went away.
The Hare and the Hedgehog iii
Then she made a figure of straw, and dressed it in her own
clothes, and gave it a red mouth, and set it to watch the kettle of
bran, and then she went home to her mother. Back again came the
rabbit, saying, "Get upl get upl" and he went up and hit the straw figmre on the head, so that it tumbled down.
And the rabbit thought that he had killed his bride, and he went
away and was very sad.
The Hare and the Hedgehog
This story, my dear young folks, seems to be false, but it really is
true, for my grandfather, when relating it always used to say, "It
must be true, my son, or else no one could tell it to you." The story is as follows.
One Sunday morning about harvest time, just as the buckwheat
was in bloom, the sim was shining brightly in heaven, the east wind
was blowing warmly over the stubble-fields, the larks were singing
in the air, the bees buzzing among the buckwheat, the people were
all going in their Sunday clothes to chvuch, and all creatures were
happy, and the hedgehog was happy too.
The hedgehog, however, was standing by his door with his arms
akimbo, enjoying the morning breezes, and slowly trilling a little
song to himself, which was neither better nor worse than the songs
which hedgehogs are in the habit of singing on a blessed Sunday
morning. While he was thus singing half aloud to himself, it suddenly occurred to him that while his wife was washing and drying
the children, he might very well take a walk into the field, and see
how his turnips were going on. The turnips were, in fact, close be- side his house, and he and his family were accustomed to eat them,
for which reason he looked upon them as his own. No sooner said
than done. The hedgehog shut the house-door behind him, and
took the path to the field. He had not gone very far from home, and
was just turning round the sloe-bush which stands there outside the
field, to go up into the turnip-field, when he observed the hare, who
had gone out on business of the same kind, namely, to visit his
cabbages.
When the hedgehog caught sight of the hare, he bade him a
friendly good morning. But the hare, who was in his own way a dis-
112 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
tingmshed gentleman, and frightfully haughty, did not return the
hedgehog's greeting, but said to him, assimiing at the same time a
very contemptuous manner, "How do you happen to be running
about here in the field so early in the morning?" "1 am taking a
walk," said the hedgehog. "A walk!" said the hare, with a smile. "It
seems to me that you might use your legs for a better purpose." This answer made the hedgehog furiously angry, for he can bear
anything but an attack on his legs, just because they are crooked by nature.
So now the hedgehog said to the hare, "You seem to imagine
that you can do more with your legs than I with mine." "That is
just what I do think," said the hare. "That can be put to the test,"
said the hedgehog. "I wager that if we run a race, I will outstrip
you." "That is ridiculousi You with your short legs!" said the hare.
"But for my part I am willing, if you have such a monstrous fancy
for it. What shall we wager?" "A golden louis-d'or and a bottle of
brandy," said the hedgehog. "Done," said the hare. "Shalce hands
on it, and then it may as well come off at once." "Nay," said the
hedgehog, "there is no such great hurryl I am still fasting, I will go home first, and have a little breakfast. In half an hour I will be
back again at this place." Hereupon the hedgehog departed, for the hare was quite
satisfied with this. On his way the hedgehog thought to himself,
"The hare relies on his long legs, but I will contrive to get the better of him. He may be a great man, but he is a very silly fellow, and he
shall pay for what he has said." So when the hedgehog reached
home, he said to his wife, "Wife, dress yourself quickly, you must
go out to the field with me." "What is going on, then?" said his
wife. "I have made a wager with the hare, for a gold loms-d'or and a bottle of brandy. I am to nm a race with him, and you must be
present." "Good heavens, husband," the wife now cried, "are you out of your mind? Have you completely lost your wits? What can
make you want to run a race with the hare?" "Hold your tongue,
woman," said the hedgehog, "that is my affair. Don't begin to dis- cuss things which are matters for men. Be off, dress, and come with
me." What could the hedgehog's wife do? She was forced to obey him, whether she liked it or not.
So when they had set out on their way together, the hedgehog
said to his wife, "Now pay attention to what I am going to i>ay. Look you, I will make the long field our race-course. The hare shall run in one furrow, and I in another, and we will begin to nm from
the top. Now all that you have to do is to place yourself here below
The Hare and the Hedgehog 113
in the furrow, and when the hare arrives at the end of the furrow
on the other side of you, you must cry out to him, 'I am here alreadyl' "
Then they reached the field, and the hedgehog showed his wife
her place, and then walked up the field. When he reached the top,
the hare was aheady there. "Shall we start?" said the hare. "Certainly," said the hedgehog. "Then both at once." So saying, each
placed himself in his own furrow. The hare coimted, "Once, twice,
thrice, and away!" and went off like a whirlwind down the field. The hedgehog, however, only ran about three paces, and then he
stooped down in the furrow, and stayed quietly where he was.
When the hare therefore arrived in full career at the lower end of
the field, the hedgehog's wife met him with the cry, "I am here alreadyl" The hare was shocked and wondered not a Httle. He thought it was the hedgehog himself who was calling to him, for
the hedgehog's wife looked just like her husband. The hare, however, thought to himself, "That has not been done fairly," and
cried, "It must be run again, let us have it again." Once more he went off like the wind in a storm, so that he seemed to fly. But the
hedgehog's wife stayed quietly in her place. So when the hare reached the top of the field, the hedgehog himseff cried out to him,
"I am here already." The hare, however, quite beside himself with
anger, cried, "It must be run again, we must have it again." "All
right," answered the hedgehog, "for my part we'll run as often as
you choose." So the hare ran seventy-three times more, and the hedgehog always held out against him, and every time the hare
reached either the top or the bottom, either the hedgehog or his
wife said, "1 am here already." At the seventy-fourth time, however, the hare could no longer
reach the end. In the middle of the field he fell to the ground, the
blood streamed out of his mouth, and he lay dead on the spot. But
the hedgehog took the louis-d'or which he had won and the bottle of brandy, called his wife out of the furrow, and both went home
together in great deHght, and if they are not dead, they are living there still.
This is how it happened that the hedgehog made the hare run
races with him on the Buxtehude heath till he died, and since that
time no hare has ever had any fancy for nmning races with a
Buxtehude hedgehog.
The moral of this story, however, is, firstly, that no one, however
great he may be, should permit himseff to jest at any one beneath
him, even ff he be only a hedgehog. And, secondly, it teaches, that
114 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
when a man marries, he should take a wife in his own position, who
looks just as he himself looks. So whosoever is a hedgehog let him
see to it that his wife is a hedgehog also, and so forth.
The Dog and the Sparrow
There was once a sheep-dog whose master behaved ill to him and
did not give him enough to eat, and when for hunger he could bear
it no longer, he left his service very sadly. In the street he was met
by a sparrow, who said, "Dog, my brother, why are you so sad?"
And the dog answered, "I am hungry and have nothing to eat."
Then said the sparrow, "Dear brother, come with me into the
town; I will give you plenty." Then they went together into the town, and soon they came to a
butcher's stall, and the sparrow said to the dog, "Stay here while I
reach you down a piece of meat," and he perched on the stall, looked round to see that no one noticed him, and packed, pulled,
and dragged so long at a piece that lay near the edge of the board
that at last it slid to the ground. The dog picked it up, ran with it
into a comer, and ate it up. Then said the sparrow, "Now come v^dth me to another stall, and I will get you another piece, so that
your hunger may be satisfied." When the dog had devoured a second piece the sparrow asked,
"Dog, my brother, are you satisfied now?" "Yes, as to meat, I am,"
answered he, "but I have had no bread."
Then said the sparrow, "That also shall you have; come with
me." And he led him to a baker's stall and pecked at a few httle rolls imtil they fell to the ground, and as the dog still wanted more,
they went to another stall farther on and got more bread.
When that was done the sparrow said, "Dog, my brother, are you
satisfied yet?" "Yes," answered he, "and now we will walk a little
outside the town." And they went together along the high road. It was warm
weather, and when they had gone a Httle way the dog said, "1 am
tired, and would like to go to sleep." "Well, do so," said the sparrow; "in the meanwhile I will sit near on a bough." The dog laid himself in the road and fell fast asleep, and as he
lay there a wagoner came up with a wagon and three horses, laden
The Dog and the Sparrow 115
with two casks of wine. The sparrow, seeing that he was not going
to turn aside but kept in the beaten track, just where the dog lay,
cried out, "Wagoner, take care, or you shall suffer for iti"
But the wagoner, muttering, "What harm can you do to me?" cracked his whip and drove his wagon over the dog, and he was
crushed to death by the wheels. Then the sparrow cried, "You have
killed the dog my brother, and it shall cost you horses and cart!"
"OhI horses and cart!" said the wagoner, "what harm can you do
me, I should like to know?" and drove on. The sparrow crept under the covering of the wagon and pecked
at the bung-hole of one of the casks until the cork came out, and all
the wine ran out without the wagoner noticing. After a while, looking round, he saw that something dripped from the wagon, and on
examining the casks he found that one of them was empty, and he
cried out, "I am a ruined man!"
"Not ruined enough yet!" said the sparrow, and flying to one of the horses he perched on his head and pecked at his eyes. When
the wagoner saw that he took out his axe to hit the sparrow, who at
that moment flew aloft, and the wagoner, missing him, struck the
horse on the head, so that he fell down dead. "Oh, I am a ruined man!" cried he.
"Not ruined enough yet!" said the sparrow, and as the wagoner drove on with the two horses that were left, the sparrow crept
again under the wagon-covering and pecked the cork out of the
second cask, so that aU the wine leaked out. When the wagoner became aware of it, he cried out again, "Oh! I am a ruined man!"
But the sparrow answered, "Not rmned enough yet!" and perched
on the second horse's head and began pecking at his eyes. Back ran the wagoner and raised his axe to strike, but the sparrow flying aloft,
the stroke fell on the horse, so that he was killed. "Oh! I am a ruined
man!" cried the wagoner.
"Not ruined enough yet!" said the sparrow, and perching on the third horse began pecking at his eyes. The wagoner struck out in
his anger at the sparrow without taking aim, and missing him, he
laid his third horse dead. "Oh! I am a ruined man!" he cried.
"Not ruined enough yet!" answered the sparrow, flying off; "I will see to that at home." So the wagoner had to leave his wagon standing, and went home
full of rage. "Oh!" said he to his wife, "what ill-luck I have had!
The wine is spilt, and the horses are all three dead."
"Oh husband!" answered she, "such a terrible bird has come to this house; he has brought with him all the birds of the air, and
ii6 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
there they are in the midst of our wheat, devouring it." And he looked and there were thousands upon thousands of birds sitting on
the ground, having eaten up all the wheat, and the sparrow in the
midst, and the wagoner cried, "Oh! I am a ruined man!"
"Not ruined enough yet!" answered the sparrow. "Wagoner, it
shall cost you your life!" and he flew away. Now the wagoner, having lost everything he possessed, went indoors and sat down, angry and miserable, behind the stove. The
sparrow was perched outside on the window-sill, and cried, "Wagoner, it shall cost you your Ufe!" Then the wagoner seized his axe and threw it at the sparrow, but
it broke the window sash in two and did not touch the sparrow,
who now hopped inside, perched on the stove, and cried, "Wagoner, it shall cost you your Ufe!" and he, mad and blind with rage, beat in the stove, and as the sparrow flew from one spot to another,
hacked everything in pieces— furniture, looking-glasses, benches,
table, and the very walls of his house— and yet did not touch the
sparrow.
At last he caught and held him in his hand.
"Now," said his v^dfe, "shall I not kill him?" "No!" cried he,
"that were too easy a death; I wiU swallow him," and as the bird
was fluttering in the man's mouth, it stretched out its head, saying,
"Wagoner, it shall cost you your life!"
Then the wagoner reached the axe to his wife saying, "Wife, strike me this bird dead." The wife struck, but missed her aim, and the blow fell on the
wagoner's head, and he dropped down dead. But the sparrow flew over the hills and away.
Old Sultan
There was once a peasant who owned a faithful dog called Sultan,
now grown so old that he had lost aU his teeth, and could lay hold
of nothing. One day the man was standing at the door of his house
with his wife, and he said, "I shall Idll old Sultan tomorrow; he is
of no good any longer."
His wife felt sorry for the poor dog, and answered, "He has
Old Sultan 117
served us for so many years, and has kept with us so faithfully; he
deserves food and shelter in his old age."
"Dear me, you do not seem to understand the matter," said the
husband; "he has never a tooth, and no thief would mind him in the least, so I do not see why he should not be made away with. If
he has served us well, we have given him plenty of good food." The poor dog, who was lying stretched out in the sun not far off,
heard all they said, and was very sad to think that the next day
would be his last. He bethought him of his great friend the wolf,
and slipped out in the evening to the wood to see him, and related
to him the fate that was awaiting him.
"Listen to me, old fellow," said the wolf; "he of good courage, I will help you in your need. I have thought of a way. Early tomorrow morning your master is going hay-making with his wife, and
they will take their child with them, so that no one will be left at
home. They will be sure to lay the child in the shade behind the
hedge while they are at work; you must He by its side, just as if you
were watching it. Then I will come out of the wood and steal away
the child and you must rush after me, as if to save it from me. Then
I must let it faU, and you must bring it back again to its parents, who
will think that you have saved it, and will be much too grateful to
do you any harm. On the contrary, you will be received into full
favor, and they will never let you want for anything again." The dog was pleased with the plan, which was carried out accordingly. When the father saw the wolf running away with his
child he cried out, and when old Sultan brought it back again, he
was much pleased with him, and patted him, saying, "Not a hair of him shall be touched; he shaU have food and shelter as long as he
lives." And he said to his wife, "Go home directly and make some good stew for old Sultan, something that does not need biting; and
get the piUow from my bed for him to lie on." From that time old Sultan was made so comfortable that he had
nothing left to wish for.
Before long the wolf paid him a visit, to congratulate him that all
had gone so well. "But, old fellow," said he, "you must wink at my
making off by chance with a fat sheep of your master's; perhaps
one will escape some fine day." "Don't reckon on that," answered
the dog; "I cannot consent to it; I must remain true to my master." But the wolf, not supposing it was said in earnest, came sneaking
in the night to carry off the sheep. But the master, who had been
warned by the faithful Sultan of the wolfs intention, was waiting
ii8 Grimms Complete Fairy Tales
for him, and gave him a fine hiding with the threshing-flail. So the
wolf had to make his escape, calling out to the dog, "You shall pay
for this, you traitorl" The next morning the wolf sent the wild boar to call out the dog,
and to appoint a meeting in the wood to receive satisfaction from
him. Old Sultan could find no second but a cat with three legs, and
as they set off together, the poor thing went limping along, holding
her tail up in the air. The wolf and his second were already on the
spot. When they saw their antagonists coming, and caught sight of
the elevated tail of the cat, they thought it was a saber they were
bringing with them. And as the poor thing came limping on three
legs, they supposed it was lifting a big stone to throw at them. This
frightened them very much; the wild boar crept among the leaves,
and the wolf clambered up into a tree. And when the dog and cat
came up, they were surprised not to see any one there. However,
the wild boar was not perfectly hidden in the leaves, and the tips of
his ears peeped out. And when the cat caught sight of one, she
thought it was a mouse, and sprang upon it, seizing it with her
teeth. Out leaped the wild boar with a dreadful cry, and ran away
shouting, "There is the culprit in the treel" And the dog and the cat, looking up, caught sight of the wolf,
who came down, quite ashamed of his timidity, and made peace
with the dog once more.
Mr. Korbes
A COCK and a hen once wanted to go on a journey together. So the
cock built a beautiful carriage with four red wheels, and he
harnessed four little mice to it. And the cock and the hen got into
it, and were driven off. Very soon they met a cat, who asked where
they were going. The cock answered,
"On Mr. Korbes a call to pay. And that is where we go todayr
"Take me with you," said the cat.
The cock answered, "Very well, only you must sit well back, and then you will not fall forward.
The Vagabonds iig
"And pray take care Of my red wheels there; And wheels he steady.
And mice he ready
On Mr. Korhes a call to pay.
For that is where we go today!"
Then there came up a mill-stone, then an egg, then a duck, then a
pin, and lastly a needle, who all got up on the carriage, and were
diiven along. But when they came to Mr. Korbes's house he was not at home. So the mice drew the carriage into the bam, the cock
and the hen flew up and perched on a beam, the cat sat by the
fireside, the duck settled on the water; but the egg wrapped itself
in the towel, the pin stuck itself in the chair cushion, the needle
jumped into the bed among the pillows, and the miU-stone laid itself by the door.
Then Mr. Korbes came home, and went to the hearth to make a
fire, but the cat threw ashes in his eyes. Then he ran quickly into
the kitchen to wash himself, but the duck splashed water in his
face. Then he was going to wipe it with the towel, but the egg
broke in it, and stuck his eyelids together. In order to get a little
peace he sat down in his chair, but the pin ran into him, and, start- ing up, in his vexation he threw himself on the bed, but as his
head fell on the pillow, in went the needle, so that he called out
with the pain, and madly rushed out. But when he reached the
housedoor the mill-stone jumped up and struck him dead. What a bad man Mr. Korbes must have beenl
The Vagabonds
Tee cocx said to the hen, 'It is nutting time; let us go together to the mountains and have a good feast for once, before the squirrels
come and carry all away." "Yes," answered the hen, "come along;
we will have a jolly time together." Then they set off together to the mountains, and as it was a fine
day they stayed there till the evening. Now whether it was that
they had eaten so much, or because of their pride and haughtiness,
I do not know, but they would not go home on foot; so the cock set
to work to make a little carriage out of nutshells. When it was
120 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
ready, the hen seated herself in it, and said to the cxjck, *T>Iow you
can harness yourself to it."
^That's all very fine," said the cock, *1 would sooner go home on
foot than do such a thing, and I never agreed to it. I don't mind being coachman, and sitting on the box; but as to drawing it myself, it's quite out of the question."
As they were wrangling, a duck came quacking, "You thieving vagabonds, who told you you might go to my mountain? Look out,
or it will be the worse for youl" And she flew at the cock with bill wide open. But the cock was not backward, and he gave the duck a
good dig in the body, and hacked at her with his spurs so valiantly
ttiat she begged for mercy, and willingly aUowed herself to be
harnessed to the carriage. Then the cock seated himself on the box
and was coachman; so off they went at a great pace, the cock crying out "Run, duck, as fast as you cani" When they had gone a part of the way they met two foot-passengers—a pin and a needle. They cried "Stop! stopl" and said that
it would soon be blindman's holiday; that they could not go a step farther; that the ways were very muddy; might they just get in for
a Httle? They had been standing at the door of the tailors' house of call and had been delayed because of beer.
The cock, seeing they were slender folks that would not take up
a great deal of room, let them both step in, only they must promise
not to tread on his toes nor on the hen's. Late in the evening they came to an inn, and there they found
that they could not go any farther that night, as the duck's paces were not good— she waddled so much from side to side— so they turned in. The landlord at first made some difficulty; his house was
full already, and he thought they had no very distinguished appear- ance. At last, however, when they had made many fine speeches,
and had promised him the egg that the hen had laid on the way,
and that he should keep the duck, who laid one every day, he
agreed to let them stay the night; and so they had a very gay time.
Early in the morning, when it was beginning to grow light, and
everybody was still asleep, the cock waked up the hen, fetched the
egg, and made a hole in it, and they ate it up between them, and
put the eggshell on the hearth. Then they went up to the needle,
who was still sleeping, picked him up by his head, and stuck him in
the landlord's chair-cushion, and, having also placed the pin in his towel, off they flew over the hills and far away. The duck, who had
chosen to sleep in the open air, and had remained in the yard,
heard the rustling of their wings, and, waking up, looked about till
The Owl 121
she found a brook, down which she swam a good deal faster than
she had drawn the carriage.
A few hours later the landlord woke, and, leaving his feather-bed,
began washing himself; but when he took the towel to dry himself
he drew the pin all across his face, and made a red streak from ear
to ear. Then he went into the kitchen to light his pipe, but when he
stooped towards the hearth to take up a coal the eggshell flew in
his eyes.
"Everything goes wrong this morning," said he, and let himself
drop, full of vexation, into his grandfather's chair; but up he
jumped in a moment, crying, "Oh dear!" for the needle had gone into him.
Now he became angry, and had his suspicions of the guests who
had arrived so late the evening before; and when he looked round
for them they were nowhere to be seen.
Then he swore that he would never more harbor such vagabonds,
that consumed so much, paid nothing, and played such nasty tricks
into the bargain.
The Owl
Twa.0R THREE hundred years ago, when people were far from being
so crafty and cunning as they are nowadays, an extraordinary event
took place in a Uttle town. By some mischance one of the great
owls, called homed owls, had come from the neighboring woods
into the bam of one of the townsfolk in the night-time, and when
day broke did not dare to venture forth again from her retreat, for
fear of the other birds, which raised a terrible outcry whenever she
appeared.
In the morning when the manservant went into the bam to fetch
some straw, he was so mightily alarmed at the sight of the owl sitting there in a comer, that he ran away and announced to his
master that a monster, the like of which he had never set eyes on
in his life, and which could devour a man without the slightest
difficulty, was sitting in the bam, rolling its eyes about in its head.
"I know you already," said the master, "you have courage enough to chase a blackbird about the fields, but when you see a dead hen
lying, you have to get a stick before you go near it. I must go and
122 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
see for myself what kind of a monster it is," added the master, and went quite boldly into the granary and looked round him. When,
however, he saw the strange grim creature with his own eyes, he was no less terrified than the servant had been. With two bounds
he sprang out, ran to his neighbors, and begged them imploringly
to lend him assistance against an unknown and dangerous beast, or
else the whole town might be in danger if it were to break loose out
of the bam, where it was shut up.
A great noise and clamor arose in all the streets, the townsmen
came armed with spears, hay-forks, scythes, and axes, as if they
were going out against an enemy; finally, the senators appeared
with the burgomaster at their head. When they had drawn up in
the market-place, they marched to the bam, and surrounded it on
all sides. Thereupon one of the most courageous of them stepped
forth and entered with his spear lowered, but came miming out immediately afterwards with a shriek, and as pale as death, and could
not utter a single word. Yet two others ventured in, but they fared no better.
At last one stepped forth, a great strong man who was famous for
his warlike deeds, and said, "You will not drive away the monster by merely looking at him; we must be in earnest here, but I see that
you have all turned into women, and not one of you dares to encoimter the animal." He ordered them to give him some armor, had a sword and spear brought, and armed himself. All praised his
courage, though many feared for his life. The two barn-doors were
opened, and they saw the owl, which in the meantime had perched
herself on the middle of a great cross-beam. He had a ladder
brought, and when he raised it, and made ready to climb up, they
all cried out to him that he was to bear himself bravely, and commended him to St. George, who slew the dragon. When he had just
got to the top, and the owl perceived that he had designs on
her, and was also bewildered by the crowd and the shouting, and
knew not how to escape, she rolled her eyes, ruflBled her feather,
flapped her wings, snapped her beak, and cried, "Tuwhit, tuwhoo," in a harsh voice. "Strike home! strike home!" screamed the crowd
outside to the valiant hero. "Any one who was standing where I am
standing," answered he, "would not cry 'strike home!' " He certainly did plant his foot one rung higher on the ladder, but then he began
to tremble, and half-fainting, went back again. And now there was no one left who dared to put himself in such
danger. "The monster," said they, "has poisoned and mortally wounded the very strongest man among us, by snapping at him and
The Bremen Town Musicians 123
just breathing on him! Are we, too, to risk our lives?" They took counsel as to what they ought to do to prevent the whole town
being destroyed. For a long time everything seemed to be of no
use, but at length the burgomaster found an expedient. "My opinion," said he, "is that we ought, out of the common purse, to pay for this bam, and whatsoever com, straw, or hay it contains, and
thus indemnify the owner, and then bum down the whole building,
and the terrible beast with it. Thus no one will have to endanger
his life. This is no time for thinking of expense, and niggardliness
would be ill applied." All agreed with him. So they set fire to the bam at aU four comers, and with it the owl was miserably burnt.
Let any one who will not believe it, go thither and inquire for him- self.
The Bremen Town Musicians
Thebe was once an ass whose master had made him carry sacks to
the mill for many a long year, but whose strength began at last to
fail, so that each day as it came, found him less capable of work.
Then his master began to think of turning him out, but the ass,
guessing that something was in the wind that boded him no good,
ran away, taking the road to Bremen; for there he thought he might
get an engagement as town musician.
When he had gone a little way he found a hoimd lying by the
side of the road panting, as if he had run a long way. "Now,
Holdfast, what are you so out of breath about?" said the ass.
"Oh dear!" said the dog, "now I am old, I get weaker every day, and can do no good in the hunt, so, as my master was going to have
me killed, I have made my escape; but now how am I to gain a
hving?" "I will tell you what," said the ass, *1 am going to Bremen to be- come town musician. You may as well go with me, and take up
music too. I can play the lute, and you can beat the drum." And the dog consented, and they walked on together.
It was not long before they came to a cat sitting in the road, looking as dismal as three wet days. "Now then, what is the matter
with you, old shaver?" said the ass.
*T should like to know who would be cheerful when his neck is
124 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
in danger?" answered the cat. "Now that I am old my teeth are get- ting blunt, and I would rather sit by the oven and purr than run
about after mice, and my mistress wanted to drown me, so I took
myself off; but good advice is scarce, and I do not know what is to
become of me."
"Go with us to Bremen," said the ass, "and become town musician. You understand serenading." The cat thought well of the idea, and went with them accordingly.
After that the three travelers passed by a yard, and a cock was
perched on the gate crowing with all his might. "Your cries are
enough to pierce bone and marrow," said the ass; "what is the
matter?"
"I have foretold good weather for Lady-day, so that all the shirts may be washed and dried; and now on Sunday morning company is
coming, and the mistress has told the cook that I must be made into
soup, and this evening my neck is to be wnmg, so that I am crowing with all my might while I can."
"You had much better go with us. Chanticleer," said the ass.
"We are going to Bremen. At any rate that will be better than dying. You have a powerful voice, and when we are all performing
together it will have a very good effect." So the cock consented, and they went on all four together.
But Bremen was too far off to be reached in one day, and towards evening they came to a wood, where they determined to pass
the night. The ass and the dog lay down under a large tree; the cat
got up among the branches; and the cock flew up to the top, as that
was the safest place for him. Before he went to sleep he looked all
round him to the four points of the compass, and perceived in the
distance a little Hght shining, and he called out to his companions
that there must be a house not far off, as he could see a Hght, so
the ass said, "We had better get up and go there, for these are uncomfortable quarters." The dog began to fancy a few bones, not quite bare, would do him good. And they all set off in the direction
of the Hght, and it grew larger and brighter, until at last it led them
to a robber's house, all Hghted up. The ass, being the biggest, went up to the window, and looked in.
"Well, what do you see?" asked the dog. "What do I see?" answered the ass; "here is a table set out with splendid eatables and drinkables, and robbers sitting at it and making themselves very
comfortable." "That would just suit us," said the cock. "Yes, indeed, I wish we were there," said the ass. Then they consulted together how it should be managed so as to
The Bremen Town Musicians 125
get the robbers out of the house, and at last they hit on a plan. The
ass was to place his fore-feet on the window-sill, the dog was to get
on the ass's back, the cat on the top of the dog, and lastly, the cock
was to fly up and perch on the cat's head. When that was done, at a given signal they all began to perform their music. The ass brayed,
the dog barked, the cat mewed, and the cock crowed; then they
burst through into the room, breaking all the panes of glass. The
robbers fled at the dreadful sound; they thought it was some goblin, and fled to the wood in the utmost terror. Then the four companions sat down to table, made free with the remains of the meal,
and feasted as if they had been hungry for a month. And when
they had finished they put out the lights, and each sought out a
sleeping-place to suit his nature and habits. The ass laid himself
down outside on the dunghill, the dog behind the door, the cat on
the hearth by the warm ashes, and the cock settled himself in the
cockloft; and as they were all tired with their long journey they
soon fell fast asleep.
When midnight drew near, and the robbers from afar saw that
no light was burning, and that everything appeared quiet, their
captain said to them that he thought that they had run away without reason, telling one of them to go and reconnoitre. So one of
them went, and found everything quite quiet. He went into the
kitchen to strike a light, and taking the glowing fiery eyes of the cat
for burning coals, he held a match to them in order to kindle it. But
the cat, not seeing the joke, flew into his face, spitting and scratching. Then he cried out in terror, and ran to get out at the back door,
but the dog, who was lying there, ran at him and bit his leg; and as
he was rushing through the yard by the dunghill the ass struck out
and gave him a great kick with his hindfoot; and the cock, who had
been wakened with the noise, and felt quite brisk, cried out, "Cock- a-doodle-dool"
Then the robber got back as well as he could to bis captain, and
said, "Oh dearl in that house there is a gruesome witch, and I felt her breath and her long nails in my face; and by the door there
stands a man who stabbed me in the leg with a knife; and in the
yard there lies a black specter, who beat me with his wooden club;
and above, upon the roof, there sits the justice, who cried, 'Bring
that rogue here!' And so I ran away from the place as fast as I
could." From that time forward the robbers never ventured to that
house, and the four Bremen town musicians found themselves so
126 Grimms Complete Fairy Tales
well off where they were, that there they stayed. And the person
who last related this tale is still living, as you see.
The Wonderful Musician
A WONDERFUL musician was walking through a forest, thinking of
nothing in particular. When he had nothing more left to think
about, he said to himself, "I shall grow tired of being in this wood,
so I will bring out a good companion." He took the fiddle that hung at his back and fiddled so that the
wood echoed. Before long a wolf came through the thicket and
trotted up to him.
"Oh, here comes a wolfl I had no particular wish for such company," said the musician. But the wolf drew nearer, and said to
him, "Ho, you musician, how finely you playl I must learn how to
play too." "That is easily done," answered the musician; "you have
only to do exactly as I tell you." "Oh musician," said the wolf, "I
will obey you, as a scholar does his master." The musician told him to come vwth him. As they went a part of
the way together they came to an old oak tree, which was hollow
v^thin and cleft through the middle. "Look here," said the musician, "if you want to learn how to fiddle, you must put your forefeet in this cleft." The wolf obeyed, but the musician took up a stone and quickly
wedged both his paws with one stroke, so fast, that the wolf was a
prisoner, and there obliged to stop. "Stay there imtil I come back
again," said the musician, and went his way.
After a while he said again to himself, "I shall grow weary here
in this wood; I will bring out another companion"; and he took his fiddle and fiddled away in the wood. Before long a fox came slinking through the trees.
"Oh, here comes a fox!" said the musician; "I had no particular
wish for such company."
The fox came up to him and said, "Oh my dear musician, how
finely you play! I must learn how to play too." "That is easily
done," said the musician; "you have only to do exactly as I teU
you." "Oh musician," answered the fox, "I will obey you, as a scholar his master."
The Wonderful Musician 127
"Follow me," said the musician; and as they went a part of the way together they came to a footpath with a high hedge on each
side. Then the musician stopped, and taking hold of a hazel-branch bent it down to the earth, and put his foot on the end of it; then he
bent down a branch from the other side, and said, "Come on, little
fox, if you wish to learn something, reach me your left fore-foot." The fox obeyed, and the musician bound the foot to the left-hand
branch. "Now, little fox," said he, "reach me the right one"; then he bound it to the right-hand branch. And when he had seen that the knots were fast enough he let go, and the branches flew back and
caught up the fox, shaking and struggling, in the air. "Wait there
until I come back again," said the musician, and went his way.
By and by he said to himself, "I shall grow weary in this wood; I
will bring out another companion." So he took his fiddle, and the sound echoed through the wood. Then a hare sprang out before
him. "Oh, here comes a harel" said he; "that's not what I want."
"Ah, my dear musician," said the hare, "how finely you playl I
should like to learn how to play too." "That is soon done," said the
musician, "only you must do whatever I tell you."
"Oh musician," answered the hare, "1 will obey you, as a scholar his master." So they went a part of the way together, \mtil they came to a
clear place in the wood where there stood an aspen tree. The musician tied a long string round the neck of the hare, and knotted the other end of it to the tree.
"Now then, courage, little harel Run twenty times round the
treel" cried the musician, and the hare obeyed. As he ran round the twentieth time the string had woimd twenty times round the tree
trunk and the hare was imprisoned, and puU and tug as he would
he only cut his tender neck with the string. "Wait there until I
come back again," said the musician, and walked on. The wolf meanwhile had struggled, and pulled, and bitten at the
stone, and worked away so long, that at last he made his paws free
and got himself out of the cleft. Full of anger and fury he hastened
after the musician to tear him to pieces.
When the fox saw him run by he began groaning, and cried out
with all his might, "Brother wolf, come and help me! The musician
has betrayed me." The wolf then pulled the branches down, bit the knots in two, and set the fox free, and he went with him to take
vengeance on the musician. They found the imprisoned hare, and
set him likewise free, and then they all went on together to seek
their enemy.
128 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
The musician had once more played his fiddle, and this time he
had been more fortmiate. The sound had reached the ears of a poor
wood-cutter, who immediately, and in spite of himself, left his work, and, with his axe under his arm, came to Hsten to the music.
"At last here comes the right sort of companion," said the musician; "it was a man I wanted, and not wild animals." And then he began to play so sweetly that the poor man stood as if enchanted,
and his heart was filled with joy. And as he was standing there up
came the wolf, the fox, and the hare, and he could easily see that
they meant mischief. Then he raised his shining axe, and stood in
front of the musician, as if to say, "Whoever means harm to him
had better take care of himself, for he will have to deal with me I" Then the animals were frightened, and ran back into the wood,
and the musician, when he had played once more to the man to
show his gratitude, went on his way.
The Mouse, the Bird, and the Sausage
Once on a time, a mouse and a bird and a sausage hved and kept
house together in perfect peace among themselves, and in great
prosperity. It was the bird's business to fly to the forest every day and bring back wood; the mouse had to draw the water, make the
fire, and set the table; and the sausage had to do the cooking.
Nobody is content in this world; much will have morel One day the
bird met another bird on the way, and told him of his excellent
condition in life. But the other bird called him a poor simpleton to
do so much work, while the two others led easy fives at home.
When the mouse had made up her fire and drawn water, she
went to rest in her fittle room until it was time to lay the cloth. The
sausage stayed by the saucepans, looked to it that the victuals were
well cooked, and just before dinner-time he stirred the broth or the
stew three or four times well round himself, so as to enrich and season and flavor it. Then the bird used to come home and lay down
his load, and they sat down to table, and after a good meal they
would go to bed and sleep their fill till the next morning. It really
was a most satisfactory fife.
But the bird came to the resolution next day never again to fetch
wood. He had, he said, been their slave long enough; now they
The Crumbs on the Table 129
must change about and make a new arrangement. So in spite of all
the mouse and the sausage could say, the bird was determined to
have his own way. So they drew lots to settle it, and it fell so that
the sausage was to fetch wood, the mouse was to cook, and the bird was to draw water.
Now see what happened. The sausage went away after wood, the
bird made up the fire, and the mouse put on the pot, and they
waited until the sausage should come home, bringing the wood for
the next day. But the sausage was absent so long, that they thought
something must have happened to him, and the bird went part of
the way to see if he could see anything of him. Not far off he met
with a dog on the road, who, looking upon the sausage as lawful
prey, had picked him up, and made an end of him. The bird then
lodged a complaint against the dog as an open and flagrant robber,
but it was all no good, as the dog declared that he had found
forged letters upon the sausage, so that he deserved to lose his life.
The bird then very sadly took up the wood and carried it home
himself, and related to the mouse all he had seen and heard. They
were both very troubled, but determined to look on the bright side
of things, and still to remain together. And so the bird laid the
cloth, and the mouse prepared the food, and finally got into the pot,
as the sausage used to do, to stir and flavor the broth; but then she
had to part with fur and skin, and lastly with Hfel
And when the bird came to dish up the dinner, there was no
cook to be seen; and he timied over the heap of wood, and looked
and looked, but the cook never appeared again. By accident the
wood caught fire, and the bird hastened to fetch water to put it out,
but he let fall the bucket in the well, and himself after it, and as he
could not get out again, he was obliged to be drowned.
The Crumbs on the Table
A COUNTRYMAN ouc day said to his little puppies, "Come into the
parlor and enjoy yourselves, and pick up the bread-crumbs on the
table; your mistress has gone out to pay some visits." Then the little
dogs said, ''No, no, we will not go. If the mistress gets to know it,
she will beat us." The countryman said, "She will know nothing
about it. Do come; after all, she never gives you anything good."
130 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
Then the little dogs again said, "Nay, nay, we must let it alone, we
must not go." But the countryman let them have no peace until at last they went, and got on the table, and ate up the bread-crumbs
with all their might. But at that very moment the mistress came,
and seized the stick in great haste, and beat them and treated them
very badly. And when they were outside the house, the little dogs
said to the countryman, "Do, do, do, do, do you see what happened?" Then the countryman laughed and said, "Didn't, didn't,
didn't you expect it?" So they just had to run away.
The Cat and the Mouse in Partnership
A CAT having made acquaintance with a mouse, pretended such
great love for her, that the mouse agreed that they should live and
keep house together.
"We must make provision for the winter," said the cat, "or we shall suffer hunger, and you, little mouse, must not stir out, or you
will be caught in a trap." So they took counsel together and bought a Httle pot of fat. And
then they could not tell where to put it for safety, but after long
consideration the cat said there could not be a better place than the
church, for nobody would steal there; and they would put it under
the altar and not touch it until they were really in want. So this was
done, and the little pot placed in safety.
But before long the cat was seized with a great wish to taste it.
"Listen to me, little mouse," said he; "I have been asked by my cousin to stand god-father to a little son she has brought into the
world; he is white with brown spots; and they want to have the
christening today; so let me go to it, and you stay at home and keep
house."
"Oh yes, certainly," answered the mouse, "pray go, by all means; and when you are feasting on all the good things, think of me. I
should so hke a drop of the sweet red wine." But there was not a word of truth in all tliis; the cat had no
cousin, and had not been asked to stand god-father. He went to the
church, straight up to the httle pot, and Hcked the fat off the top.
Then he took a walk over the roofs of the town, saw his acquaintances, stretched himself in the sim, and licked his whiskers as
The Cat and the Mouse in Partnership 131
often as he thought of the little pot of fat, and then when it was
evening he went home.
"Here you are at last," said the mouse; "I expect you have had a
merry time." "Oh, pretty well," answered the cat. "And what name
did you give the child?" asked the mouse. "Top-oflF," answered the
cat, drily. "Top-off!" cried the mouse, "that is a singular and wonderful namel Is it common in your family?" "What does it matter?"
said the cat; "it's not any worse than Cnmib-picker, like your godchild." A little time after this the cat was again seized with a longing.
"Again I must ask you," said he to the mouse, "to do me a favor, and keep house alone for a day. I have been asked a second time to
stand god-father; and as the little one has a white ring round its
neck, I cannot well refuse." So the kind little mouse consented, and the cat crept along by the
town wall until he reached the church, and going straight to the little pot of fat, devoured half of it. "Nothing tastes so well as what
one keeps to oneself," said he, feeling quite content with his day's work.
When he reached home, the mouse asked what name had been
given to the child. "Half-gone," answered the cat. "Half-gonel"
cried the mouse, "I never heard such a name in my lifel I'll bet it's
not to be found in the calendar."
Soon after that the cat's mouth began to water again for the fat.
"Good things always come in threes," said he to the mouse; "again I have been asked to stand god-father. The little one is quite black
with white feet, and not any white hair on its body; such a thing
does not happen every day, so you will let me go, won't you?"
"Top-off, Half-gone," murmured the mouse, "they are such curious names, I cannot but wonder at them!" "That's because you are
always sitting at home," said the cat, "in your little gray frock and
hairy tail, never seeing the world, and fancying all sorts of things." So the little mouse cleaned up the house and set it aU in order.
Meanwhile the greedy cat went and made an end of the little pot
of fat. "Now all is finished, one's mind will be easy," said he, and came home in the evening, quite sleek and comfortable.
The mouse asked at once what name had been given to the third
child. "It won't please you any better than the others," answered
the cat. "It is called All-gone." "All-gone!" cried the mouse. "What an unheard-of name! I never met with anything like it! AU-gonel
Whatever can it mean?" And shaking her head, she curled herself
132 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
round and went to sleep. After that the cat was not again asked to
stand god-father.
When the winter had come and there was nothing more to be
had out of doors, the mouse began to think of their store. "Come,
cat," said she, "we will fetch our pot of fat; how good it will taste,
to be surel" "Of course it will," said the cat, "just as good as iE you
stuck yom* tongue out of window!" So they set out, and when they reached the place, they found the
pot, but it was standing empty.
"Oh, now I know what it aU meant," cried the mouse; "now I see what sort of a partner you have beenl Instead of standing godfather you have devoiu-ed it all up; first Top-off, then Half-gone,
then" —
"Will you hold your tongue!" screamed the cat, "another word,
and I devour you too!"
And the poor little mouse, having "All-gone" on her tongue, out it came, and the cat leaped upon her and made an end of her. And
that is the way of the world.
The Spider and the Flea
A Spider and a Flea dwelt together in one house, and brewed their
beer in an egg-shell. One day, when the Spider was stirring it up, she fell in and scalded herself. Thereupon the Flea began to
scream. And then the Door asked, "Why are you screaming, Flea?"
"Because little Spider has scalded herself in the beer-tub," replied she.
Thereupon the Door began to creak as if it were in pain; and a
Broom, which stood in the comer, asked, "What are you creaking
for, Door?" "May I not creak?" it replied,
"The little Spidei^s scalded herself.
And the Flea weeps!' So the Broom began to sweep industriously, and presently a little
Cart came by, and asked the reason. "May I not sweep?" replied the Broom,
"The little Spider's scalded herself. And the Flea weeps;
The little Door creaks with the pain."
The Spider and the Flea 133
Thereupon the litde Cart said, "So will I run," and began to run
very fast past a heap of Ashes, which cried out, "Why do you run,
little Cart?" "Because," replied the Cart,
"The little Spiders scalded herself. And the Flea weeps;
The little Door creaks with the pain.
And the Broom sweeps."
"Then," said the Ashes, "I will bum furiously." Now, next the
Ashes there grew a Tree, which asked, "Little heap, why do you
bum?" "Because," was the reply,
"The little Spiders scalded herself. And the Flea weeps;
The little Door creaks with the pain.
And the Broom sweeps;
The little Cart runs on so fast."
Thereupon the Tree cried, "I wiU shake myself!" and went on shaking till all its leaves fell off.
A little girl passing by with a water-pitcher saw it shaking, and
asked, "Why do you shake yourself, little Tree?" "Why may I not?" said the Tree,
"The little Spide/s scalded herself. And the Flea weeps;
The little Door creaks with the pain.
And the Broom sweeps;
The little Cart runs on so fast.
And the Ashes burn."
Then the Maiden said, "If so, I will break my pitcher"; and she threw it down and broke it.
At this the Streamlet, from which she drew the water, asked,
"Why do you break your pitcher, my little Girl?" "Why may I
not?" she replied; for
"The little Spidef's scalded herself. And the Flea weeps;
The little Door creaks with the pain.
And the Broom sweeps;
The little Cart runs on so fast. And the Ashes burn;
The little Tree shakes down its leaves—
Now it is my turn!"
"Ah, then," said the Streamlet, "now must I begin to flow." And it
134 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
flowed and flowed along, in a great stream, which kept getting
bigger and bigger, until at last it swallowed up the little Girl, the
little Tree, the Ashes, the Cart, the Broom, the Door, the Flea and,
last of all, the Spider, all together.
The Wolf and the Seven Little Kids
There was once on a time an old goat who had seven little kids, and loved them with all the love of a mother for her children. One
day she wanted to go into the forest and fetch some food. So she
called all seven to her and said, "Dear children, I have to go into the forest; be on your guard against the wolf; if he comes in, he
VidU devour you all— skin, hair, and all. The wretch often disguises
himself, but you wiU know him at once by his rough voice and his
black feet."
The kids said, "Dear mother, we wdll take good care of ourselves;
you may go away without any anxiety." Then the old one bleated, and went on her way with an easy mind.
It was not long before some one knocked at the house-door and
cried, "Open the door, dear children; your mother is here, and has
brought something back with her for each of you." But the little kids knew that it was the wolf, by the rough voice.
"We wiU not open the door," cried they, "you are not our mother. She has a soft, pleasant voice, but your voice is rough; you are the
wolf!" The wolf went away to a shopkeeper and bought himself a great lump of chalk, ate this and made his voice soft with it.
Then he came back, knocked at the door of the house, and cried,
"Open the door, dear children, your mother is here and has
brought something back with her for each of you." But the wolf had laid his black paws against the window, and the
children saw them and cried, "We vidll not open the door, our
mother has not black feet like you: you are the wolf I" Then the
wolf ran to a baker and said, "I have hurt my feet; rub some dough
over them for me." And when the leaker had rubbed his feet over,
he ran to the miller and said, "Strew some white meal over my feet
for me." The miller thought to himself, "The wolf wants to deceive
some one," and refused; but the wolf said, "If you will not do it, I
The Wolf and the Seven Little Kids 135
will devour you." Then the miller was afraid, and made his paws white for him.
Now the wretch went for the third time to the house-door,
knocked at it and said, "Open the door for me, children, your dear little mother has come home, and has brought every one of you
something back from the forest with her." The little kids cried,
"First show us your paws that we may know if you are our dear little mother." Then he put his paws in through the window, and when the kids saw that they were white, they beheved that all he
said was true, and opened the door. But who should come in but the wolf!
They were terrified and wanted to hide themselves. One sprang
under the table, the second into the bed, the third into the stove,
the fourth into the kitchen, the fifth into the cupboard, the sixth
under the washing-bowl, and the seventh into the clock-case. But
the wolf found them all, and used no great ceremony; one after
the other he swallowed them down his throat. The youngest in the
clock-case was the only one he did not find.
When the wolf had satisfied his appetite he took himself off, laid
himself down under a tree in the green meadow outside, and began
to sleep.
Soon afterwards the old goat came home again from the forest.
Ahl what a sight she saw therel The house-door stood wide open.
The table, chairs, and benches were thrown down, the washingbowl lay broken to pieces, and the quilts and pillows were pulled
off the bed. She sought her children, but they were nowhere to be
found. She called them one after another by name, but no one answered. At last, when she came to the youngest, a soft voice cried,
"Dear mother, I am in the clock-case." She took the kid out, and it told her that the wolf had come and had eaten all the others. Then
you may imagine how she wept over her poor children.
At length in her grief she went out, and the youngest kid ran
with her. When they came to the meadow, there lay the wolf by
the tree and snored so loud that the branches shook. She looked at
him on every side and saw that something was moving and struggling in his gorged body. "Ah, heavens," said she, "is it possible that my poor children whom he has swallowed down for his supper, can be still alive?" Then the kid had to run home and fetch scissors, and a needle
and thread, and the goat cut open the monster's stomach, and hardly had she made one cut, than one little kid thrust its head out,
and when she had cut farther, all six sprang out one after another,
136 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
and were all still aHve, and had suffered no injury whatever, for in
his greediness the monster had swallowed them down whole. What
rejoicing there was! Then they embraced their dear mother, and
jumped like a tailor at his wedding.
The mother, however, said, "Now go and look for some big
stones, and we will fill the wicked beast's stomach with them while
he is still asleep." Then the seven Idds dragged the stones thither with all speed, and put as many of them into his stomach as they
could get in; and the mother sewed him up again in the greatest
haste, so that he was not aware of anything and never once stirred.
When the wolf at length had had his sleep out, he got on his legs,
and as the stones in his stomach made him very thirsty, he wanted
to go to a well to drink. But when he began to walk and to move
about, the stones in his stomach knocked against each other and
rattled. Then cried he,
"What rumbles and tumbles
Against my poor bones?
I thought 'twas six kids.
But it's naught but big stones."
And when he got to the well and stooped over the water and was
just about to drink, the heavy stones made him fall in and there
was no help, but he had to drown miserably. When the seven kids
saw that, they came running to the spot and cried aloud, "The wolf
is dead! The wolf is dead!" and danced for joy roimd about the weU with their mother.
The Wolf and the Fox
A WOLF and a fox once Hved together. The fox, who was the weaker
of the two, had to do all the hard work, which made him anxious to
leave his companion.
One day, passing through a wood, the wolf said, "Red-fox, get
me something to eat, or I shall eat you."
The fox answered, "I know a place where there are a couple of
nice young lambs; if you like, we will go and fetch one." This pleased the wolf, so they went. The fox stole one, brought it
to the wolf, and then ran away, leaving his comrade to devour it.
The Wolf and the Fox 137
This done, the wolf was not content, but wishing for the other,
went himself to fetch it; and being very awkward, the old sheep
saw him, and began to cry and bleat so horribly that the farmer s
people came running to see what was the matter. Of course they
found the wolf there, and beat him so unmercifully, that, howling
and limping, he returned to the fox. ''You had already shown me
how, so I went to fetch the other lamb," said he, "but the farmer's
people discovered me, and have nearly killed me."
"Why are you such a glutton?" replied the fox.
The next day they went again into the fields. "Red-fox," said the
wolf, "get me something quickly to eat, or I shall eat you I"
"Well," replied the fox, "I know a farm, where the woman is
baking pancakes this evening; let us go and fetch some." They went accordingly, and the fox, sUpping round the house, peeped and
sniffed so long, that he found out at last where the dish stood, then
quietly abstracting six pancakes, he carried them to the wolf.
"Here is something for you to eat," said he, and then went away. The wolf had swallowed the six pancakes in a very short space of
time, and said, "I should very much like some more." But going to help himself, he pulled the dish down from the shelf; it broke into a
thousand pieces, and the noise, in addition, brought out the
farmer's wife to discover what was the matter. Upon seeing the wolf, she raised such an alarm, that all the people came with sticks
or any weapon they could snatch. The consequence was that the
wolf barely escaped with his life; he was beaten so severely that he
could scarcely hobble to the wood where the fox was.
"Pretty mischief you have led me into," said the wolf, when he
saw him, "the peasants have caught, and nearly flayed me."
"Why, then, are you such a glutton?" replied the fox. Upon a third occasion, being out together, and the wolf only able
with difficulty to limp about, he nevertheless said again, "Red-fox,
get me something to eat, or I shall eat youl"
"Well," said the fox, "I know a man who has been butchering, and has all the meat salted down in a tub in his cellar. We will go
and fetch it."
"That will do," said the wolf, "but I must go with you, and you
can help me to get off, if anything should happen." The fox then showed him all the by-ways, and at last they came
to the cellar, where they found meat in abundance, which the wolf
instantly greedily attacked, saying at the same time to himself,
"Here, there is no occasion to hurry." The fox also showed no hesi- tation, only, while eating, he looked sharply about him, and ran oc-
138 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
casionally to the hole by which they had entered in order to try if
he was still small enough to get out by the same way he had come in.
"Friend fox," said the wolf, "pray tell me why you are so fidgety,
and why you run about in such an odd manner." *1 am looking
out, lest any one should come," replied the cunning creature.
"Come, are you not eating too much?"
"I am not going away," said the wolf, "until the tub is empty; that would be foolishl" In the meantime, the farmer, who had heard the fox running
about, came into the cellar to see what was stirring, and upon the
first sight of him, the fox with one leap was through the hole and
on his way to the wood. But when the wolf attempted to follow, he
had so increased his size by his greediness, that he could not succeed, and stuck in the hole, which enabled the farmer to kiU him
with his cudgel. The fox, however, reached the wood in safety, and
rejoiced to be freed from the old glutton.
The Wolf and the Man
A Fox was one day talking to a Wolf about the strength of man.
"No animals," he said, "could withstand Man, and they were
obliged to use cunning to hold their own against him."
The Wolf answered, "If ever I happen to see a Man, I should attack him all the same."
"Well, I can help you to that," said the Fox. "Come to me early
tomorrow, and I will show you one!" The Wolf was early astir, and the Fox took him out to a road in
the forest, traversed daily by a Huntsman.
First came an old discharged soldier. "Is that a Man?" asked the
Wolf. "No," answered the Fox. "He has been a Man."
After that a little boy appeared on his way to school. 'Is that a
Man?" "No; he is going to be a Man." At last the Huntsman made his appearance, his gun on his back,
and his hunting-knife at his side. The Fox said to the Wolf, "Lookl There comes a Man. You may attack him, but I will make off to my
holel" The Wolf set on the Man, who said to himself when he saw him,
Gossip Wolf and the Fox 139
"What a pity my gun isn't loaded with ball," and fired a charge of shot in the WolFs face. The Wolf made a wry face, but he was not
to be so easily frightened, and attacked him again. Then the Huntsman gave him the second charge. The Wolf swallowed the pain,
and rushed at the Huntsman. But the Man drew his bright huntingknife, and hit out right and left with it, so that, streaming with
blood, the Wolf ran back to the Fox.
"Well, brother Wolf," said the Fox, "and how did you get on
with the Man?"
"Alas!" said the Wolf. "I never thought the strength of man would be what it is. First, he took a stick from his shoulder, and
blew into it, and something flew into my face, which tickled frightfully. Then he blew into it again, and it flew into my eyes and nose
like lightning and hail. Then he drew a shining rib out of his body,
and struck at me with it till I was more dead than alive."
"Now, you see," said the Fox, "what a braggart you are. You
throw your hatchet so far that you can't get it back again."
Gossip Wolf and the Fox
The she- wolf brought forth a young one, and invited the fox to be
godfather. "After all, he is a near relative of ours," said she, "he has a good understanding, and much talent; he can instruct my little
son, and help him forward in the world." The fox, too, appeared
quite honest, and said, "Worthy Mrs. Gossip, I thank you for the honor which you are doing me; I will, however, conduct myself in
such a way that you shall be repaid for it." He enjoyed himself at the feast, and made merry. Afterwards he
said, "Dear Mrs. Gossip, it is our duty to take care of the child, it must have good food that it may be strong. I know a sheep-fold
from which we might fetch a nice morsel." The wolf was pleased, and she went out with the fox to the farmyard. He pointed out the fold from afar, and said, "You will be able to creep in there without being seen, and in the meantime I will
look about on the other side to see if I can pick up a chicken." He, however, did not go there, but sat down at the entrance to the for- est, stretched his legs and rested.
The she-wolf crept into the stable. A dog was lying there, and it
140 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
made such a noise that the peasants came running out, caught Gossip Wolf, and poured a strong burning mixture, which had been
prepared for washing, over her sldn. At last she escaped, and
dragged herself outside.
There lay the fox, who pretended to be full of complaints, and
said, "Ah, dear Mistress Gossip, how ill I have fared, the peasants have fallen on me, and have broken every limb I have; if you do
not want me to He where I am and perish, you must carry me
away." The she-wolf herself was only able to go away slowly, but she was in such concern about the fox that she took him on her
back, and slowly carried him perfectly safe and sound to her house.
Then the fox cried to her, "Farewell, dear Mistress Gossip, may
the roasting you have had do you good," laughed heartily at her, and bounded oflF.
Little Red Riding Hood
There was once a sweet little maid, much beloved by everybody,
but most of all by her grandmother, who never knew how to make
enough of her. Once she sent her a little riding hood of red velvet,
and as it was very becoming to her, and she never wore anything
else, people called her Little Red Riding Hood.
One day her mother said to her, "Come, Little Red Riding Hood, here are some cakes and a flask of wine for you to take to grandmother; she is weak and ill, and they will do her good. Make haste
and start before it grows hot, and walk properly and nicely, and
don't run, or you might fall and break the flask of wine, and there would be none left for grandmother. And when you go into her
room, don't forget to say good morning, instead of staring about
you." "I will be sure to take care," said Little Red Riding Hood to her mother, and gave her hand upon it.
Now the grandmother Hved away in the wood, half an hour's walk from the village; and when Little Red Riding Hood had
reached the wood, she met the wolf; but as she did not know what
a bad sort of animal he was, she did not feel frightened.
"Good day. Little Red Riding Hood," said he. "Thank you
kindly, wolf," answered she. "Where are you going so early. Little
Red Riding Hood?" "To my grandmother's." "What are you carry-
Little Red Riding Hood 141
ing under your apron?" "Cakes and wine; we baked yesterday; and my grandmother is very weak and ill, so they will do her good, and
strengthen her."
"Where does your grandmother live, Little Red Riding Hood?"
"A quarter of an hour's walk from here; her house stands beneath
the three oak trees, and you may know it by the hazel bushes," said Little Red Riding Hood.
The wolf thought to himself, 'That tender young thing would be a delicious morsel, and would taste better than the old one; I must
manage somehow to get both of them." Then he walked by Little Red Riding Hood a little while, and
said, "Little Red Riding Hood, just look at the pretty flowers that
are growing all round you; and I don't think you are hstening to the song of the birds; you are posting along just as if you were going to
school, and it is so delightful out here in the wood." Little Red Riding Hood glanced round her, and when she saw
the sunbeams darting here and there through the trees, and lovely
flowers everywhere, she thought to herself, "If I were to take a fresh nosegay to my grandmother she would be very pleased, and
it is so early in the day that I shall reach her in plenty of time"; and so she ran about in the wood, looking for flowers. And as she
picked one she saw a still prettier one a little farther off, and so she went farther and farther into the wood.
But the wolf went straight to the grandmother's house and
knocked at the door. "Who is there?" cried the grandmother. "Little Red Riding Hood," he answered, "and I have brought you some
cake and wine. Please open the door." "Lift the latch," cried the
grandmother; "I am too feeble to get up." So the wolf lifted the latch, and the door flew open, and he fell
on the grandmother and ate her up without saying one word. Then
he drew on her clothes, put on her cap, lay down in her bed, and drew the curtains.
Little Red Riding Hood was all this time running about among
the flowers, and when she had gathered as many as she could hold,
she remembered her grandmother, and set off to go to her. She was
surprised to find the door standing open, and when she came inside
she felt very strange, and thought to herself, "Oh dear, how uncom- fortable I feel, and I was so glad this morning to go to my grandmother!"
And when she said, "Good morning," there was no answer. Then she went up to the bed and drew back the curtains; there lay the
142 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
grandmother with her cap pulled over her eyes, so that she looked
very odd.
"O grandmother, what large ears you havel" "The better to hear
with." "O grandmother, what great eyes you have!" "The better to see
with." "O grandmother, what large hands you have!" "The better to
take hold of you with."
"But, grandmother, what a terrible large mouth you have!" 'The
better to devour youl" And no sooner had the wolf said it than he made one bound from the bed, and swallowed up poor Little Red
Riding Hood.
Then the wolf, having satisfied his hunger, lay down again in the
bed, went to sleep, and began to snore loudly. The huntsman heard
him as he was passing by the house, and thought, "How the old woman snores— I had better see if there is anything the matter with
her." Then he went into the room, and walked up to the bed, and saw
the wolf lying there. "At last I find you, you old sinner!" said he; "I
have been looking for you a long time." And he made up his mind that the wolf had swallowed the grandmother whole, and that she might yet be saved. So he did not fire,
but took a pair of shears and began to sUt up the wolFs body. When
he made a few snips Little Red Riding Hood appeared, and after a
few more snips she jumped out and cried, "Oh dear, how fright- ened I have been! It is so dark inside the wolf." And then out came the old grandmother, stiU living and breathing. But Little
Red Riding Hood went and quickly fetched some large stones, with
which she filled the wolfs body, so that when he waked up, and
was going to rush away, the stones were so heavy that he sank down and fell dead.
They were aU three very pleased. The huntsman took ofiF the
wolfs skin, and carried it home. The grandmother ate the cakes, and
drank the wine, and held up her head again, and Little Red Riding
Hood said to herself that she would never more stray about in the
wood alone, but would mind what her mother told her.
It must also be related how a few days afterwards, when Little
Red Riding Hood was again taking cakes to her grandmother, another wolf spoke to her, and wanted to tempt her to leave the path;
but she was on her guard, and went straight on her way, and told
her grandmother how that the wolf had met her, and wished her
good day, but had looked so wicked about the eyes that she
How Mrs. Fox Married Again 143
thought if it had not been on the high road he would have de- voured her.
"Come," said the grandmother, "we will shut the door, so that
he may not get in." Soon after came the wolf knocking at the door, and calling out,
"Open the door, grandmother, I am Little Red Riding Hood, bringing you cakes." But they remained still, and did not open the door. After that the wolf slunk by the house, and got at last upon the roof
to wait until Little Red Riding Hood should return home in the
evening; then he meant to spring down upon her, and devour her in
the darkness. But the grandmother discovered his plot. Now there
stood before the house a great stone trough, and the grandmother
said to the child, "Little Red Riding Hood, I was boiHng sausages yesterday, so take the bucket, and carry away the water they were
boiled in, and pour it into the trough." And Little Red Riding Hood did so imtil the great trough was
quite full. When the smell of the sausages reached the nose of the
wolf he snuffed it up, and looked round, and stretched out his neck
so far that he lost his balance and began to slip, and he slipped down
off the roof straight into the great trough, and was drowned. Then
Little Red Riding Hood went cheerfully home, and came to no harm.
How Mrs. Fox Married Again
1
There was once an old fox with nine tails, who wished to put his
wife's affection to proof. He pretended to be dead, and stretched himself under the bench quite stiff, and never moved a joint; on
which Mrs. Fox retired to her room and locked herself in, while her
maid, the cat, stayed by the kitchen fire and attended to the cooldng.
When it became known that the old fox was dead, some suitors
prepared to come forward, and presently the maid heard some one
knocking at the house door; she went and opened it, and thqre was
a young fox, who said,
"What is she doing. Miss Cat?
Is she sleeping, or waking, or what is she at?"
144 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
And the cat answered,
"I am not asleep, I am quite toide awake; Perhaps you would know what Tm going to make;
I'm melting some butter, and warming some beer.
Will it please you sit down, and partake of my cheer?"
'Thank you, miss," said the fox, "What is Mrs. Fox doing?" The maid answered,
"She is sitting upstairs in her grief. And her eyes with her weeping are sore;
From her sorrow she gets no relief.
Now poor old Mr. Fox is no moreF'
*13ut just tell her, miss, that a yomig fox has come to woo her."
*Very well, young master," answered the cat.
Up went the cat, pit-a-pat, pit-a-pat.
She knocks at the door, rat-a-tat, rat-a-tatl
"Mrs. Fox, are you there?'
'yes, yes, pussy dear!" 'There's a suitor below.
Shall I tell him to goF'
"But what is he like?" asked Mrs. Fox. 'Has he nine beautiful
tails, like dear Mr. Fox?" "Oh no," answered the cat; "he has only
one." "Then I won't have him," said Mrs. Fox. So the cat went
down-stairs, and sent the suitor away. Soon there was another knock at the door. It was another fox
come to woo. He had two tails, but he met with no better success
than the first. Then there arrived more foxes, one after another,
each with one more tail than the last, but they were all dismissed,
until there came one with nine tails like old Mr. Fox. When the
widow heard that she cried, full of joy, to the cat,
"Now, open door and window wide. And turn old Mr. Fox outside."
But before they could do so, up jumped old Mr. Fox from under
the bench, and cudgeled the whole pack, driving them, with Mrs.
Fox, out of the house.
How Mrs. Fox Married Again 145
11
When old Mr. Fox died there came a wolf to woo, and he knocked
at the door, and the cat opened to him; and he made her a bow,
and said,
"Good day. Miss Cat, so brisk and gay, How is it that alone you stay?
And what is it you cook today?"
The cat answered,
"Bread so white, and milk so sweet.
Will it please you sit and eatF'
"Thank you very much. Miss Cat," answered the wolf; "but is Mrs. Fox at home?" Then the cat said,
"She is sitting upstairs in her grief. And her eyes with her weeping are sore;
From her sorrow she gets no relief.
Now poor old Mr. Fox is no morer
The wolf answered,
"Wont she take another spouse.
To protect her and her house?" Up went the cat, pit-a-pat, pit-a-pat.
She knocks at the door, rat-a-tat, rat-a-tati
"Mrs. Fox, are you there?"
"Yes, yes, pussy dear!" "There's a suitor below.
Shall I tell him to goF'
But Mrs. Fox asked, "Has the gentleman red breeches and a
sharp nose?" "No," answered the cat. "Then I won't have him," said Mrs. Fox.
After the wolf was sent away, there came a dog, a stag, a hare, a
bear, a Hon, and several other wild animals. But they aU of them
lacked the good endowments possessed by the late Mr. Fox, so that
the cat had to send them all away.
At last came a yoimg fox. And Mrs. Fox inquired whether he had
red breeches and a sharp nose. "Yes, he has," said the cat. "Then I
146 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
will have him," said Mrs, Fox, and bade the cat make ready the wedding-feast.
"Now, cat, sweep the parlors and bustle about. And open the window, turn Mr. Fox out;
Then, if you've a fancy for anything nice. Just manage to catch for yourself a few mice.
You may eat them alone,
I do not want one."
So she was married to young Master Fox with much dancing and
rejoicing, and for anything I have heard to the contrary, they may
be dancing still.
The Fox and the Geese
The fox once came to a meadow in which was a flock of fine fat
geese, on which he smiled and said, "I come at the nick of time, you are sitting together quite beautifully, so that I can eat you up
one after the other." The geese cackled with terror, sprang up, and began to wail and beg piteously for their lives. But the fox would
listen to nothing, and said, "There is no mercy to be hadl You must
die." At length one of them took heart and said, 'If we poor geese are to yield up our vigorous young lives, show us the only possible
favor and allow us one more prayer, that we may not die in our
sins, and then we will place ourselves in a row, so that you can always pick yourself out the fattest." "Yes," said the fox, "that is rea- sonable, and a pious request. Pray away, I will wait till you are
done." Then the first began a good long prayer, forever saying,
"Ga! Gal" and as she would make no end, the second did not wait
until her turn came, but began also, "Gal Gal" The third and fourth followed her, and soon they were all cackling together.
When they have done praying, the story shall be continued further, but at present they are still praying, and they show no sign of
stopping.
The Fox and the Horse
A PEASANT had a faithful horse which had grown old and could do
no more work, so his master would no longer give him anything to
eat and said, "I can certainly make no more use of you, but stiU I mean well by you; if you prove yourself still strong enough to bring
me a lion here, I will maintain you, but now take yourself away out
of my stable," and with that he chased him into the open country. The horse was sad, and went to the forest to seek a little protection
there from the weather.
There a fox met him and said, "Why do you hang your head so,
and go about all alone?" "Alas," repHed the horse, "avarice and fidelity do not dwell together in one house. My master has forgotten what services I have performed for him for so many years, and
because I can no longer plough well, he will give me no more food,
and has driven me out." "Without giving you a chance?" asked the
fox. "The chance was a bad one. He said, if I were still strong enough to bring him a hon, he would keep me, but he well knows
that I cannot do that." The fox said, "I wiU help you. Just lay your- self down, stretch yourself out, as if you were dead, and do not
stir," The horse did as the fox desired, and the fox went to the lion,
who had his den not far oflF, and said, "A dead horse is lying outside there, just come with me, you can have a rich meal." The hon went with him, and when they were both standing by the horse the
fox said, "After all it is not very comfortable for you here— I tell you what— I wiU fasten it to you by the tail, and then you can drag
it into your cave, and devour it in peace." This advice pleased the lion. He lay down, and in order that the
fox might tie the horse fast to him, he kept quite quiet. But the fox
tied the Hon's legs together with the horse's tail, and twisted and fastened all so well and so strongly that no strength could break it.
When he had finished his work, he tapped the horse on the shoulder
and said, 'Tull, white horse, pull." Then up sprang the horse at once, and drew the lion away with him. The lion began to roar so
that all the birds in the forest flew out in terror, but the horse let
him roar, and drew him and dragged him over the country to his
master's door. When the master saw the lion, he was of a better mind, and said
148 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
to the horse, "You shall stay with me and fare weU," and he gave him plenty to eat until he died.
The Fox and the Cat
It happened that the cat met the fox in a forest, and as she thought
to herself, "He is clever and full of experience, and much esteemed
in the world," she spoke to him in a friendly way. "Good day, dear Mr. Fox, how are you? How is all with you? How are you getting
through this dear season?" The fox, full of all kinds of arrogance, looked at the cat from
head to foot, and for a long time did not know whether he would
give any answer or not. At last he said, "Oh, thou wretched beard- cleaner, thou piebald fool, thou hungry mousehimter, what canst
thou be thinking of? Dost thou venture to ask how I am getting on?
What has thou learnt? How many arts dost thou understand?"
"I understand but one," replied the cat, modestly. "What art is
that?" asked the fox. "When the hounds are following me, I can
spring into a tree and save myself." "Is that all?" said the fox. "I am master of a hundred arts, and have into the bargain a sackful of
cunning. Thou makest me sorry for thee; come with me, I will
teach thee how people get away from the hounds." Just then came a hunter with four dogs. The cat sprang nimbly
up a tree, and sat down at the top of it, where the branches and foliage quite concealed her. "Open your sack, Mr. Fox, open your
sack," cried the cat to him, but the dogs had already seized him,
and were holding him fast. "Ah, Mr. Fox," cried the cat. "You with your hundred arts are left in the lurch! Had you been able to climb
like me, you would not have lost your Hf e."
The Sole
The fishes had for a long time been discontented because no order
prevailed in their kingdom. None of them turned aside for the
The Willow-Wren 149
others, but all swam to the right or the left as they fancied, or
darted between those who wanted to stay together, or got into their
way; and a strong one gave a weak one a blow with its tail, which
drove it away, or else swallowed it up vwthout more ado. "How delightful it would be," said they, "if we had a King who enforced
law and justice among us I" And they met together to choose for their ruler the one who could cleave through the water most
quickly and give help to the weak ones.
They placed themselves in rank and file by the shore, and the pike
gave the signal with his tail, on which they all started. Like an
arrow, the pike darted away, and with him the herring, the gudgeon, the perch, the carp, and all the rest of them. Even the sole
swam with them, and hoped to reach the winning-place. All at
once, the cry was heard, "The herring is first. The herring is firstl"
"Who is first?" screamed angrily the flat envious sole, who had
been left far behind, "who is first?" "The herringl The herring,"
was the answer. "The naked herring?" cried the jealous creature,
"the naked herring?"
Since that time the sole's mouth has been at one side for a pim- ishment
The Willow-Wren
In days gone by every sound had its meaning and application.
When the smith's hammer resounded, it cried, "Strike awayl Strike
away." When the carpenter's plane grated, it said, "Here goesl
Here goes." If the mill wheel began to clack, it said, "Help, Lord
God! Help, Lord God!" And if the miller was a cheat and happened to leave the miU, it spoke High German, and first asked slowly,
"Who is there? Who is there?" and then answered quickly, "The
miller! The miller!" and at last quite in a hurry, "He steals bravely!
He steals bravely! Three pecks in a bushel." At this time the birds also had their own language which every
one understood; now it only sounds like chirping, screeching, and
whistling, and to some, Hke music without words. It came into the
birds' minds, however, that they would no longer be v^dthout a ruler, and would choose one of themselves to be their King. One
alone among them, the green plover, was opposed to this. He had
150 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
lived free and would die free, and anxiously flying hither and
thither, he cried, "Where shall I go? Where shall I go?" He retired into a solitary and unfrequented marsh, and showed himself no
more among his fellows.
The birds now wished to discuss the matter, and on a fine May
morning they all gathered together from the woods and fields:
eagles and chaffinches, owls and crows, larks and sparrows— how
can I name them all? Even the cuckoo came, and the hoopoe, his
clerk, who is so called because he is always heard a few days before
him; and a very small bird, which as yet had no name, mingled
v^th the band. The hen, which by some accident had heard nothing
of the whole matter, was astonished at the great assemblage.
"What, what, what is going to be done?" she cackled; but the cock
calmed his beloved hen, and said, "Only rich people," and told her what they had on hand. It was decided, however, that the one who
could fly the highest should be King. A tree-frog which was sitting
among the bushes, when he heard that, cried a warning, "No, no,
nol nol" because he thought that many tears would be shed because
of this; but the crow said, "Caw, caw," and that all would pass off peaceably.
It was now determined that on this fine morning they should at
once begin to ascend, so that hereafter no one should be able to
say, "1 could easily have flown much higher, but the evening came
on, and I could do no more." On a given signal, therefore, the whole troop rose up in the air. The dust ascended from the land,
and there was tremendous fluttering and whirring and beating of
vdngs, and it looked as if a black cloud was rising up. The little
birds were, however, soon left behind. They could go no farther,
and fell back to the ground. The larger birds held out longer, but
none could equal the eagle, who mounted so high that he could
have picked the eyes out of the sun. When he saw that the others
could not get up to him, he thought, "Why should I fly stiU higher?
I am the King." And he began to let himself dovm again. The birds
beneath him at once cried, "You must be our King; no one has
flown so high." "Except me," screamed the Httle fellow vsdthout a name, who had crept into the breast-feathers of the eagle. And as
he was not at all tired, he rose up and mounted so high that he
reached heaven itself. When, however, he had gone as far as this,
he folded his wdngs together, and called dovwi wdth clear and penetrating voice, "I am KingI I am King."
"You, our KingI" cried the birds angrily. 'You have compassed it
by trick and cunning!" So they made another condition. He should
The Willow-Wren 151
be King who could go down lowest in the groimd. How the goose
did flap about with its broad breast when it was once more on the
land! How quickly the cock scratched a holel The duck came oflE
the worst of all, for she leapt into a ditch, but sprained her legs,
and waddled away to a neighboring pond, crying, "Cheating,
cheatingl" The Kttle bird without a name, however, sought out a mouse-hole, sHpped down into it, and cried out of it with his small
voice, *1 am Kingl I am Kingl"
"You our King!" cried the birds still more angrily. "Do you think
your cunning shaU prevail?" They determined to keep him a pris- oner in the hole and starve him out. The owl was placed as sentinel
in front of it, and was not to let the rascal out if she had any value
for her life. When evening was come all the birds were feeling very
tired after exerting their wings so much, so they went to bed with
their wives and children. The owl alone remained standing by the
mouse-hole, gazing steadfastly into it with her great eyes. In the
meantime she, too, had grown tired and thought to herself, "You might certainly shut one eye, you will still watch with the other,
and the little miscreant shall not come out of his hole." So she shut
one eye, and with the other looked straight at the mouse-hole. The
little fellow put his head out and peeped, and wanted to slip away,
but the owl came forward immediately, and he drew his head back
again. Then the owl opened the one eye again, and shut the other,
intending to shut them in turn all through the night.
But when she next shut the one eye, she forgot to open the other,
and as soon as both her eyes were shut she fell asleep. The little
fellow soon observed that, and slipped away.
From that day forth, the owl has never dared to show herself by
daylight, for if she does the other birds chase her and pluck her
feathers out. She only flies out by night, but hates and pursues mice
because they make such ugly holes. The Httle bird, too, is very un- willing to let himself be seen, because he is afraid it will cost him
his life if he is caught. He steals about in the hedges, and when he
is quite safe, he sometimes cries, "I am King," and for this reason,
the other birds call him in mockery, "King of the hedges." No one, however, was so happy as the lark at not having to obey
the little King. As soon as the sun appears, she ascends high in the
air and cries, "Ah, how beautiful that is! Beautiful that is! Beautiful, beautiful! Ah, how beautiful that is!"
The Willow-Wren and the Bear
One summer day the bear and the wolf were walkmg in the forest,
and the bear heard a bird singing so beautifully that he said,
"Brother wolf, what bird is it that sings so well?" "That is the King
of the birds," said the wolf, "before whom we must bow down." It
was, however, in reality the willow-wren. 'If that's the case," said
the bear, "1 should very much like to see his royal palace; come,
take me thither." "That is not done quite as you seem to think,"
said the wolf; "you must wait until the Queen comes." Soon after- wards, the Queen arrived with some food in her beak, and the lord
King came too, and they began to feed their young ones. The bear
would have liked to go at once, but the wolf held him back by the
sleeve, and said, "No, you must wait until the lord and lady Queen
have gone away again." So they observed the hole in which was the nest, and trotted away.
The bear, however, could not rest until he had seen the royal palace, and when a short time had passed, again went to it. The King
and Queen had just flown out, so he peeped in and saw five or six
young ones lying in it. "Is that the royal palace?" cried the bear; "it
is a wretched palace, and you are not King's children, you are disreputable childrenl" When the young wrens heard that, they were
frightfully angry, and screamed, "No, that we are notl Our parents
are honest peoplel Bear, you will have to pay for that!" The bear and the wolf grew uneasy, and turned back and went
into their holes. The young willow-wrens, however, continued to
cry and scream, and when their parents again brought food they
said, "We wiU not so much as touch one fly's leg, no, not if we were dying of hunger, until you have settled whether we are respectable
children or not; the bear has been here and has insulted usl" Then
the old King said, "Be easy, he shall be punished," and he at once
flew with the Queen to the bear's cave, and called in, "Old Growler, why have you insulted my children? You shall suffer for it
—we will pimish you by a bloody war." Thus war was announced to the bear, and all four-footed animals
were summoned to take part in it— oxen, asses, cows, deer, and
every other animal the earth contained. And the willow-woren sum-
The Willoiv-Wren and the Bear 153
moned everything which flew in the air; not only birds, large and
small, but midges, and hornets, bees and flies had to come.
When the time came for the war to begin, the willow-wren sent
out spies to discover who was the enemy's commander-in-chief. The gnat, who was the most crafty, flew into the forest where the enemy
was assembled, and hid herself beneath a leaf of the tree where the
watchword was to be given. There stood the bear, and he called
the fox before him and said, "Fox, you are the most cimning of all
animals, you shall be general and lead us." "Good," said the fox,
"but what signal shall we agree upon?" No one knew that, so the
fox said, "I have a fine long bushy tail, which almost looks like a plume of red feathers. When I lift my tail up quite high, all is going
well, and you must charge; but if I let it hang down, run away as
fast as you can." When the gnat had heard that, she flew away again, and revealed everything, with the greatest minuteness, to the
wiUow-wren.
When day broke, and the battle was to begin, all the four-footed
animals came running up with such a noise that the earth trembled. The willow-wren also came flying through the air with his
army with such a humming, and whirring, and swarming, that
every one was uneasy and afraid; and on both sides they advanced
against each other. But the wiUow-wren sent down the hornet, with
orders to get beneath the fox's tail, and sting it v^dth all his might. When the fox felt the first sting, he started so that he drew up one
leg, with the pain, but he bore it, and still kept his tail high in the
air; at the second sting, he was forced to put it down for a moment;
at the third, he could hold out no longer, and screamed out and put
his tail between his legs. When the animals saw that, they thought
all was lost, and began to fly, each into his hole, and the birds had won the battle.
Then the King and Queen flew home to their children and cried,
"Children, rejoice, eat and drink to your heart's content, we have
won the battle!" But the young wrens said, "We will not eat yet, the bear must come to the nest, and beg for pardon and say that we
are honorable children, before we will do that." Then the willowwren flew to the bear's hole and cried, "Growler, you are to come to the nest to my children, and beg their pardon, or else every rib
of your body shall be broken." So the bear crept thither in the greatest fear, and begged their pardon. And now at last the yoimg
wrens were satisfied, and sat down together and ate and drank, and
made merry till quite late into the night.
The Little Folks' Presents
A TAILOR and a goldsmith were traveling together, and one evening
when the sun had sunk behind the mountains, they heard the sound
of distant music, which became more and more distinct. It sounded
strange, but so pleasant that they forgot all their weariness and
stepped quickly onwards. The moon had aheady arisen when they
reached a hill on which they saw a crowd of Httle men and women,
who had taken each other's hands, and were whirling round in the dance with the greatest pleasure and delight.
They sang to it most charmingly, and that was the music which the travelers had heard. In the midst of them sat an old man who
was rather taller than the rest. He wore a parti-colored coat, and
his iron-gray beard hung down over his breast. The two remained
standing full of astonishment, and watched the dance. The old man
made a sign that they should enter, and the little folks willingly
opened their circle. The goldsmith, who had a hmnp, and Hke all
hunchbacks was brave enough, stepped in; the tailor felt a little
afraid at first, and held back, but when he saw how merrily all was
going, he plucked up his courage, and followed. The circle closed
again directly, and the little folks went on singing and dancing with
the wildest leaps.
The old man, however, took a large knife which hung to his girdle, whetted it, and when it was suflBciently sharpened, he looked
round at the strangers. They were terrified, but they had not much
time for reflection, for the old man seized the goldsmith and with
the greatest speed, shaved the hair of his head clean off, and then
the same thing happened to the tailor. But their fear left them
when, after he had finished his work, the old man clapped them
both on the shoulder in a friendly manner, as much as to say, tiiey
had behaved well to let all that be done to them willingly, and
without any struggle. He pointed with his finger to a heap of coals
which lay at one side, and signified to the travelers by his gestures
that they were to fill their pockets with them. Both of them obeyed,
although they did not know of what use the coals would be to
them, and then they went on their way to seek a shelter for the
night. When they had got into the valley, the clock of the neighbor-
The Little Folks' Presents 155
ing monastery struck twelve, and the song ceased. In a moment all
had vanished, and the hill lay in solitude in the moonhght.
The two travelers found an inn, and covered themselves up on
their straw-beds with their coats, but in their weariness forgot to
take the coals out of them before doing so. A heavy weight on their
limbs awakened them earlier than usual. They felt in the pockets,
and could not believe their eyes when they saw that they were not
filled with coals, but with pure gold; happily, too, the hair of their
heads and beards was there again as thick as ever.
They had now become rich folks, but the goldsmith, who, in accordance with his greedy disposition, had filled his pockets better,
was as rich again as the tailor. A greedy man, even if he has much,
still wishes to have more, so the goldsmith proposed to the tailor
that they should wait another day, and go out again in the evening
in order to bring back still greater treasures from the old man on
the hill. The tailor refused, and said, "I have enough and am con- tent; now I shall be a master, and marry my dear object (for so he
called his sweetheart), and I am a happy man." But he stayed an- other day to please him.
In the evening the goldsmith hung a couple of bags over his
shoulders that he might be able to stow away a great deal, and took
the road to the hill. He found, as on the night before, the little folks
at their singing and dancing, and the old man again shaved him
clean, and signed to him to take some coal away with him. He was
not slow about sticking as much into his bags as would go, went
back quite delighted, and covered himself over with his coat.
"Even if the gold does weigh heavily," said he, "I will gladly bear
that," and at last he fell asleep with the sweet anticipation of wak- ing in the morning an enormously rich man.
When he opened his eyes, he got up in haste to examine his
pockets, but how amazed he was when he drew nothing out of
them but black coals, and that howsoever often he put his hands in
themi "The gold I got the night before is still there before me," thought he, and went and brought it out, but how shocked he was
when he saw that it likewise had again turned into coal! He smote
his forehead with his dusty black hand, and then he felt that his
whole head was bald and smooth, as was also the place where his
beard should have been. But his misfortunes were not yet over; he
now remarked for the first time that in addition to the hump on his
back, a second, just as large, had grown in front of his breast. Then
he recognized the punishment of his greediness, and began to weep
aloud. The good tailor, who was wakened by this, comforted the
156 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
unhappy fellow as well as he could, and said, "You have been my comrade in my traveling time; you shall stay with me and share my
wealth." He kept his word, but the poor goldsmith was obliged to carry the two humps as long as he lived, and to cover his bald head
with a cap.
The Elf
There was once upon a time a rich King who had three daughters,
who daily went to walk in the palace garden. The King was a great
lover of all kinds of fine trees, but there was one for which he had
such an affection that if anyone gathered an apple from it he
wished him a himdred fathoms under ground. And when harvest
time came, the apples on this tree were all as red as blood. The
three daughters went every day beneath the tree, and looked to see
if the wind had not blown down an apple, but they never by any
chance found one, and the tree was so loaded with them that it was
almost breaking, and the branches hung down to the ground.
The King's youngest child had a great desire for an apple, and
said to her sisters, "Our father loves us far too much to wish us un- derground, it is my belief that he would only do that to people who
were strangers." And while she was speaking, the child plucked off
quite a large apple, and ran to her sisters, saying, "Just taste, my dear little sisters, for never in my life have I tasted anything so delightful." Then the two other sisters also ate some of the apple, whereupon all three sank deep down into the earth, where they could hear no cock crow.
When mid-day came, the King wished to call them to come to
dinner, but they were nowhere to be found. He sought them everyv^here in the palace and garden, but could not find them. Then he
was much troubled, and made known to the whole land that whosoever brought his daughters back again should have one of them
to wife. Hereupon so many young men went about the country in
sfearch, that there was no counting them, for every one loved the
three children because they were so Idnd to all, and so fair of face.
Three young huntsmen also went out, and when they had traveled
about for eight days, they arrived at a great castle, in which were
beautiful apartments, and in one room a table was laid on whidU
The Elf 157
were delicate dishes which were still so warm that they were smoking, but in the whole of the castle no human being was either to be seen or heard.
They waited there for half a day, and the food still remained
warm and smoldng, and at length they were so hungry that they sat
down and ate, and agreed with each other that they would stay and
live in that castle, and that one of them, who should be chosen by
casting lots, should remain in the house, and the two others seek
the King's daughters. They cast lots, and the lot fell on the eldest; so next day the two younger went out to seek, and the eldest had to
stay at home.
At mid-day came a small, small mannildn and begged for a piece of bread; then the huntsman took the bread which he had found
there, and cut a round off the loaf and was about to give it to him,
but while he was giving it to the marmikin, the latter let it fall, and
asked the huntsman to be so good as to give him that piece again.
The huntsman was about to do so and stooped, on which the mannildn took a stick, seized him by the hair, and gave him a good
beating.
Next day, the second stayed at home, and he fared no better.
When the two others returned in the evening, the eldest said,
"Well, how have you got on?" "Oh, very badly," said he, and then they lamented their misfortune together, but they said nothing
about it to the youngest, for they did not like him at all, and always
called him Stupid Hans, because he did not exactly belong to the forest.
On the third day, the youngest stayed at home, and again the Httle mannikin came and begged for a piece of bread. When the
youth gave it to him, the elf let it fall as before, and asked him to
be so good as to give him that piece again. Then said Hans to the
little mannikin, "Whatl canst thou not pick up that piece thyself? If thou wilt not take as much trouble as that for thy daily bread, thou
dost not deserve to have it." Then the mannikin grew very angry and said he was to do it, but the huntsman would not, and took my
dear mannikin, and gave Ifim a thorough beating. Then the mannikin screamed terribly, and cried, "Stop, stop, and let me go, and I
will tell thee where the King's daughters are." When Hans heard that, he left off beating him and the mannikin
told him that he was an earth-mannikin, and that there were more
than a thousand hke him, and that if he would go with him he
would show him where the King's daughters were. Then he showed him a deep well, but there was no water in it. And the elf said that
158 Grimms Complete Fairy Tales
he knew well that the companions Hans had with him did not intend to deal honorably with him, therefore if he wished to deUver
the King's children, he must do it alone. The two other brothers
would also be very glad to recover the King's daughters, but they did not want to have any trouble or danger. Hans was therefore to
take a large basket, and he must seat himself in it with his hanger
and a bell, and be let down. Below were three rooms, and in each
of them was a Princess, with a many-headed dragon, whose heads
she was to comb and trim, but he must cut them off. And having
said all this, the elf vanished.
When it was evening the two brothers came and asked how he
had got on, and he said, "pretty well so far," and that he had seen no one except at mid-day when a Httle mannikin had come who
had begged for a piece of bread, that he had given some to him,
but that the mannikin had let it fall and had asked him to pick it up
again; but as he did not choose to do that, the elf had begun to lose
his temper, and that he had done what he ought not, and had given
the elf a beating, on which he had told him where the King's daughters were. Then the two were so angry at this that they grew
green and yellow.
Next morning they went to the well together, and drew lots who
should first seat himself in the basket, and again the lot fell on the
eldest, and he was to seat himself in it, and take the bell with him.
Then he said, "If I ring, you must draw me up again immediately." When he had gone down for a short distance, he rang, and they at
once drew him up again. Then the second seated himself in the
basket, but he did just the same as the first, and then it was the
turn of the youngest, but he let himself be lowered quite to the bottom. When he had got out of the basket, he took his hanger, and
went and stood outside the first door and listened, and heard the
dragon snoring quite loudly. He opened the door slowly, and one of
the Princesses was sitting there, and had nine dragon's heads lying upon her lap, and was combing them. Then he took his hanger and
hewed at them, and the nine fell off. The Princess sprang up, threw
her arms round his neck, embraced and kissed him repeatedly, and
took her stomacher, which was made of red gold, and hung it
round his neck. Then he went to the second Princess, who had a
dragon with five heads to comb, and delivered her also, and to the
youngest, who had a dragon with four heads, he went Hkewise. And
they all rejoiced, and embraced him and kissed him without stopping. Then he rang very loud, so that those above heard him, and he
The Elf 159
placed the Princesses one after the other in the basket, and had
them all drawn up, but when it came to his own turn he remem- bered the words of the elf, who had told him that his comrades did
not mean well by him. So he took a great stone which was lying
there, and placed it in the basket, and when it was about half way
up, his false brothers above cut the rope, so that the basket with the
stone fell to the ground, and they thought that he was dead, and
ran away with the three Princesses, making them promise to tell
their father that it was they who had delivered them, and then they
went to the King, and each demanded a Princess in marriage.
In the meantime the youngest huntsman was wandering about
the three chambers in great trouble, fully expecting to have to end
his days there, when he saw, hanging on the wall, a flute; then said
he, "Why do you hang there, no one can be merry here?" He
looked at the dragon's head Kkewise and said, "You cannot help me
now." He walked backwards and forwards for such a long time that he made the surface of the ground quite smooth. At last other
thoughts came to his mind, and he took the flute from the wall, and
played a few notes on it, and suddenly a number of elves appeared,
and with every note that he sounded one more came.
He played until the room was entirely filled. They all asked what
he desired, so he said he wished to get above ground back to daylight, on which they seized him by every hair that grew on his
head, and thus they flew with him on to the earth again. When he
was above ground, he at once went to the King's palace just as the
wedding of one Princess was about to be celebrated, and he went
to the room where the King and his three daughters were. When
the Princesses saw him they fainted. Hereupon the King was angry,
and ordered him to be put in prison at once, because he thought he
must have done some injury to the children. When the Princesses
came to themselves, however, they entreated the King to set him
free again. The King asked why, and they said that they were not
allowed to tell that, but their father said that they were to tell it to
the stove. And he went out, Hstened at the door, and heard everything. Then he caused the two brothers to be hanged on the gallows, and to the third he gave his youngest daughter, and on that
occasion I wore a pair of glass shoes, and I struck them against a
stone, and they said, "KHnk," and were broken.
The Foundling Bird
A FORESTER Went out shooting one day. He had not gone far into
the wood when he heard, as he thought, the cry of a child. He
turned his steps instantly toward the sound, and at length came to a
high tree, on one of the branches of which sat a Httle child.
A mother, some short time before, had seated herself under the
tree with the child in her lap, and fallen asleep. A bird of prey, see- ing the child, seized it in its beak and carried it away; but hearing
the sound of the sportsman's gun, the bird let the child fall, its clothes caught in the branches of a high tree, and there it himg,
crying, till the forester came by.
The mother, on awaking and missing her child, rushed away in
great agony to find it, so that the poor little thing would have been
left alone in the world to die had not the sportsman made his appearance.
"Poor Httle creatiurel" he said to himself as he climbed up the
tree and brought the child down, "I will take it home with me, and
it shaU be brought up with my own little Lena." He kept his word, and the Httle foundHng grew up with the
forester's Httle daughter, tiU they loved each other so dearly that they were always unhappy when separated, even for a short time.
The forester had named the child Birdie, because she had been
carried away by the bird; and Lena and Birdie were for several
years happy Httle children together.
But the forester had an old cook, who was not fond of children,
and she wanted to get rid of Birdie, who she thought was an in- truder.
One evening Lena saw the woman take two buckets to the well,
and carry them backward and forward more than twenty times.
"What are you going to do with all that water?" asked the child.
"If you will promise not to say a word, I will tell you," repHed the
woman. "I will never tell any one," she said. "Oh, very well, then look here. Tomorrow morning, early, I mean to put aU this water
into a kettle on the fire, and when it boils I shall throw Birdie in
and cook her for dinner."
Away went poor Lena, in great distress, to find Birdie. "If you
will never forsake me, I will never forsake you," said Lena. "Then,"
The Foundling Bird 161
said Birdie^ "I will never, never leave you, Lena." "Well, then," she
replied, '1 am going away and you must go with me, for old cook says she will get up early tomorrow morning, and boil a lot of
water to cook you in, while my father is out hunting. If you stay
with me, I can save you. So you must never leave me." "No, never, never!" said Birdie. So the children lay awake till dawn, and then they got up and
ran away so quickly that by the time the wicked old witch got up
to prepare the water, they were far out of her reach.
She Mt her fire, and as soon as the water boiled went into the
sleeping-room to fetch poor Httle Birdie and throw her in. But
when she came to the bed and found it empty, she was very much
frightened to find both the children gone, and said to herself,
"What will the forester say when he comes home if the children are not here? I must go downstairs as fast as I can and send some one
to catch them." Down she went, and sent three of the farm servants to run after the children and bring them back.
The children, who were sitting among the trees in the wood, saw
them coming from a distance.
"I will never forsake you. Birdie!" said Lena quickly. "Will you
forsake me?" "Never, never!" was the reply. "Then," cried Lena,
"you shall be turned into a rose bush, and I will be one of the
roses!" The three servants came up to the place where the old witch had
told them to look; but nothing was to be seen but a rose tree and a
rose. "There are no children here," they said. So they went back and told the cook that they had foimd only
roses and bushes, but not a sign of the children.
The old woman scolded them well when they told her this, and
said, "You stupid fools! you should have cut off the stem of the rose bush, and plucked one of the roses, and brought them home with
you as quickly as possible. You must just go again a second time." Lena saw them coming, and she changed herself and Birdie so
quickly that when the three servants arrived at the spot to which
the old woman had sent them they found only a little church with a
steeple— Birdie was the church and Lena the steeple.
Then the men said one to another: "What was the use of our
coming here? We may as well go home."
But how the old woman did scold! "You fools!" she said, "you should have brought the church and the steeple here. However, I
will go myself this time!"
i62 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
So the wicked old woman started off to find the children, taking
the three servants with her.
When they saw the three servants coming in the distance, and
the old woman waddling behind, Lena said, "Birdie, we will never
forsake each other." "No, no! never, neverl" replied the little foimdling. "Then you shaU be changed into a pond, and I will be a
duck swimming upon it." The old woman drew near, and as soon as she saw the pond she
laid herself down by it, and, leaning over, intended to drink it all
up. But the duck was too quick for her. She seized the head of the
old woman with her beak, and drew it under the water, and held it
there till the old witch was drowned.
Then the two children resumed their proper shape, and went
home with the three servants, all of them happy and delighted to
think that they had got rid of such a wicked old woman. The
forester was full of joy in his home with the children near the
wood; and if they are not dead they all live there still.
The Water of Life
A KING was very ill, and no one believed that he would come out of it with his hfe. He had three sons who were much distressed about
it, and went down into the palace-garden and wept. There they met
an old man who inquired as to the cause of their grief. They told
him that their father was so ill that he would most certainly die, for
nothing seemed to cure him. Then the old man said, "I know of one more remedy, and that is the water of life; if he drinks of it he will
become weU again; but it is hard to find." The eldest said, "I will
manage to find it," and went to the sick King, and begged to be al- lowed to go forth in search of the water of life, for that alone could
save him. "No," said the King, "the danger of it is too great. I
would rather die." But he begged so long that the King consented.
The Prince thought in his heart, 'If I bring the water, then I shall
be best beloved of my father, and shall inherit the kingdom." So he set out, and when he had ridden forth a little distance, a
dwarf stood there in the road who called to him and said, "Whither
away so fast?" "Silly shrimp," said the Prince, very haughtily, "it is
nothing to you," and rode on. But the little dwarf had grown angry.
The Water of Life 163
and had wished an evil wish. Soon after this the Prince entered a
ravine, and the firrther he rode the closer the mountains drew together, and at last the road became so narrow that he could not advance a step fiuther; it was impossible either to turn his horse or to
dismount from the saddle, and he was shut in there as if in prison.
The sick King waited long for him, but he came not.
Then the second son said, "Father, let me go forth to seek the
water," and thought to himself, "If my brother is dead, then the
kingdom will fall to me." At first the King would not allow him to go either, but at last he yielded, so the Prince set out on the same
road that his brother had taken, and he too met the dwarf, who
stopped him to ask whither he was going in such haste. "Little
shrimp," said the Prince, "that is nothing to you," and rode on with- out giving him another look. But the dwarf bewitched him, and he.
Like the other, got into a ravine, and could neither go forwards nor
backwards. So fare haughty people.
As the second son also remained away, the youngest begged to
be allowed to go forth to fetch the water, and at last the King was
obliged to let him go. When he met the dwarf and the latter asked
him whither he was going in such haste, he stopped, gave him an
explanation, and said, "I am seeking the water of life, for my father
is sick imto death." "Dost thou know, then, where that is to be
found?" "No," said the Prince. Then said the dwarf: "As thou hast borne thyself politely and not haughtily hke thy false brothers, I
v^dll give thee the information and teU thee how thou mayst obtain
the water of Kfe. It springs from a fountain in the court-yard of an
enchanted castle, but thou wilt not be able to make thy way to it, if
I do not give thee an iron wand and two small loaves of bread.
Strike thrice with the wand on the iron door of the castle, and it
will spring open. Inside lie two lions v^dth gaping jaws, but if thou
throwest a loaf to each of them, they wiU be quieted; then hasten to
fetch some of the water of life before the clock strikes twelve, else
the door will shut again, and thou v^dlt be imprisoned." The Prince thanked him, took the wand and the bread, and set
out on his way. When he arrived, everything was as the dwarf had
said. The door sprang open at the third stroke of the wand, and
when he had appeased the lions vidth the bread, he entered into the
castle, and came in a large and splendid hall, wherein sat some
enchanted Princes whose rings he drew off their fingers. A sword
and a loaf of bread were lying there, which he carried away. After
this, he entered a chamber in which was a beautiful maiden who
rejoiced when she saw him, kissed him, and told him that he had
164 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
delivered her, and should have the whole of her kingdom, and that
if he vi'ould return in a year their wedding should be celebrated;
likewise she told him where the spring of the water of Hfe was, and that he was to hasten and draw some of it before the clock struck
twelve. Then he went onwards, and at last entered a room where
there was a beautiful newly-made bed, and as he was very weary,
he felt incHned to rest a little. So he lay down and fell asleep.
When he awoke, it was striking a quarter to twelve. He sprang
up in a fright, ran to the spring, drew some water in a cup which
stood near, and hastened away. But just as he was passing through
the iron door, the clock struck twelve, and the door fell to with
such violence that it carried away a piece of his heel. He, however,
rejoicing at having obtained the water of life, went homewards,
and again passed the dwarf. When the latter saw the sword and the
loaf, he said, "With these thou hast won great wealth; with the sword thou canst slay whole armies, and the bread will never come
to an end." But the Prince would not go home to his father without his
brothers, and said, "Dear dwarf, canst thou not tell me where my two brothers are? They went out before I did in search of the water
of life, and have not returned." "They are imprisoned between two
mountains," said the dwarf. "I have condemned them to stay there,
because they were so haughty." Then the Prince begged until the
dwarf released them; he warned him, however, and said, "Beware
of them, for they have bad hearts." When his brothers came, he rejoiced, and told them how things
had gone with him, that he had found the water of life, and had
brought a cupful away with him, and had deHvered a beautiful
Princess, who was willing to wait a year for him, and then their
wedding was to be celebrated, and he would obtain a great
kingdom.
After that they rode on together, and chanced upon a land where
war and famine reigned, and the King already thought he must
perish, for the scarcity was so great. Then the Prince went to him
and gave him the loaf, wherewith he fed and satisfied the whole of
his kingdom, and then the Prince gave him the sword also, where- with he slew the hosts of his enemies, and could now live in rest
and peace. The Prince then took back his loaf and his sword, and the three brothers rode on.
After this they entered two more countries where war and famine
reigned, and each time the Prince gave his loaf and his sword to
the Kings, and had now delivered three kingdoms, and after that
The Water of Life 165
they went on board a ship and sailed over the sea. During the passage, the two eldest conversed apart and said, "The youngest has found the water of Hfe and not we; for that our father will give him
the kingdom— the kingdom which belongs to us, and he wiU rob us
of all our fortune." They began to seek revenge, and plotted with each other to destroy him. They waited until once when they found
him fast asleep, then they poured the water of life out of the cup,
and took it for themselves, but into the cup they poured salt seawater. Now therefore, when they arrived at home, the youngest
took his cup to the sick King in order that he might drink out of it,
and be cured. But scarcely had he drunk a very little of the salt sea- water than he became still worse than before. And as he was lamenting over this, the two eldest brothers came, and accused the
youngest of having intended to poison him, and said that they had
brought him the true water of life, and handed it to him. He had
scarcely tasted it, when he felt his sickness departing, and became
strong and healthy as in the days of his youth.
After that they both went to the youngest, mocked him, and said,
"You certainly found the water of life, but you have had the pain, and we the gain. You should have been sharper, and should have
kept your eyes open. We took it from you while you were asleep at
sea, and when a year is over, one of us will go and fetch the beauti- ful Princess. But beware that you do not disclose aught of this to
our father; indeed he does not trust you, and if you say a single
word, you shall lose your hfe into the bargain, but if you keep silent, you shall have it as a gift." The old King was angry with his youngest son, and thought he
had plotted against his hfe. So he summoned the court together,
and had sentence pronounced upon his son that he should be secretly shot. And once when the Prince was riding forth to the chase,
suspecting no evil, the King's huntsman had to go with him, and when they were quite alone in the forest, the himtsman looked so
sorrowful that the Prince said to him, "Dear huntsman, what ails
you?" The huntsman said, "I cannot tell you, and yet I ought."
Then the Prince said, "Say openly what it is, I will pardon you."
"Alas!" said the huntsman, "I am to shoot you dead, the King has
ordered me to do it." Then the Prince was shocked, and said, "Dear huntsman, let me live; there, I give you my royal garments; give me
your common ones in their stead." The huntsman said, "I will
wilhngly do that, indeed I should not have been able to shoot you." Then they exchanged clothes, and the huntsman returned home;
the Prince, however, went further into the forest.
i66 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
After a time three wagons of gold and precious stones came to
the King for his youngest son, which were sent by the three Kings
who had slain their enemies with the Prince's sword, and main- tained their people with his bread, and who wished to show their
gratitude for it. The old King then thought, "Can my son have
been innocent?" and said to his people, "Would that he were still
alive; how it grieves me that I have suffered him to be killedl" "He
still lives," said the huntsman, "I could not find it in my heart to
carry out your command," and told the King how it had happened.
Then a great weight fell from the King's heart, and he had it proclaimed in every country that his son might return and be taken
into favor again.
The Princess, however, had a road made up to her palace which
was quite bright and golden, and told her people that whosoever
came riding straight along it to her, would be the right wooer and
was to be admitted, and whoever rode by the side of it, was not the
right one, and was not to be admitted. As the time was now close at
hand, the eldest son thought he would hasten to go to the King's daughter, and give himself out as her deliverer, and thus win her
for his bride, and the kingdom to boot. Therefore he rode forth,
and when he arrived in front of the palace, and saw the splendid
golden road, he thought it would be a sin and a shame if he were to
ride over that, and turned aside, and rode on the right side of it.
When he came to the door, the servants told him that he was not
the right man, and was to go away again.
Soon after this the second Prince set out, and when he came to
the golden road, and his horse had put one foot on it, he thought it
would be a sin and a shame to tread a piece of it off, and he tirnied
aside and rode on the left side of it, and when he reached the door,
the attendants told him he was not the right one, and was to go
away again.
When at last the year had entirely expired, the third son likewise
wished to ride out of the forest to his beloved, with her to forget his
sorrows. So he set out and thought of her so incessantly, and
wished to be with her so much, that he never noticed the golden
road at all. So his horse rode onwards up the middle of it, and
when he came to the door, it was opened and the Princess received
him with joy, and said he was her deliverer, and lord of the kingdom, and their wedding was celebrated with great rejoicing. When it was over she told him that his father invited him to
come to him, and had forgiven him. So he rode thither, and told
him everything; how his brothers had betrayed him, and how he
The Water Sprite 167
had nevertheless kept silence. The old King wished to punish them,
but they had put to sea, and never came back as long as they lived.
The Water Sprite
A LITTLE brother and sister were one day playing together by the
side of a well, and not being careful, they both fell in. Under the
water they found a fairy, who said to them, "Now I have caught
you, I intend you to work for me." So she carried them both away. When they arrived at her home she set the maiden to spin hard,
tangled flax, and gave her a cask full of holes to fill with water; and
she sent the boy to the wood with a blunt axe, and told him to cut wood for her fire.
The children became at last so impatient with this treatment that
they waited till one Sunday, when the fairy was at church, and ran
away. But the church was close by, and as they were flying away
like two birds she espied them, and went after them with great strides.
The children saw her coming in the distance, and the maiden
threw behind her a great brush, which instantly became a mountain covered with prickly points, over which the fairy had the
greatest trouble to climb. But the children saw that she had man- aged to get over and was coming near.
The boy then threw a comb behind him, which became a moun- tain of combs, with hundreds of teeth sticking up; but the fairy
knew how to hold fast on this, and soon clambered over it.
The maiden next threw a looking-glass behind, which became a
mountain also, and was so slippery that it was impossible to get over it.
Then thought the fairy, "I will go home and fetch my axe and
break the looking-glass." But when she came back and had broken the looking-glass, the
children had been for a long time too far away for her to overtake
them, so she was obliged to sink back into the well.
The Table, the Ass, and the Stick
There was once a tailor who had three sons and one goat. And the
goat, as she noinished them all with her milk, was obHged to have
good food, and so she was led every day down to the willows by
the water-side; and this business the sons did in turn. One day the
eldest took the goat to the churchyard, where the best sprouts are,
that she might eat her fill and gambol about.
In the evening, when it was time to go home, he said, "Well,
goat, have you had enough?" The goat answered,
"I am so full, I cannot pull
Another blade of grass— ba! baoT
"Then come home," said the youth, and fastened a string to her, led her to her stall, and fastened her up.
"Now," said the old tailor, "has the goat had her proper food?"
"Oh," answered the son, "she is so fuU, she no more can puU." But the father, wishing to see for himself, went out to the staU, stroked
his dear goat, and said, "My dear goat, are you full?" And the goat answered,
"How can I be full? There was nothing to pull.
Though I looked all about me—bat boar
*'What is this that I hear?" cried the tailor, and he ran and called
out to the youth, "O you har, to say that the goat was full, and she
has been hungry all the timel" And in his wrath he took up his yard-measure and drove his son out of the house with many blows.
The next day came the turn of the second $on, and he found a
fine place in the garden hedge, where there were good green
sprouts, and the goat ate them aU up. In the evening, when he came
to lead her home, he said, "Well, goat, have you had enough?" And the goat answered,
"J am so full, I cannot pull
Another blade of grass— bal baaF*
The Table, the Ass, and the Stick 169
"Then come home," said the youth, and led her home, and tied her up.
"Now," said the old tailor, "has the goat had her proper food?"
"Oh," answered the son, "she is so full, she no more can pull." The tailor, not feeling satisfied, went out to the stall, and said,
"My dear goat, are you really full?" And the goat answered,
'How can I be full? There was nothing to pull.
Though I looked all about me—ba! baoT'
"The good-for-nothing rascal," cried the tailor, "to let the dear
creature go fastingl" and, running back, he chased the youth with his yard-wand out of the house.
Then came the turn of the third son, who, meaning to make all
sure, found some shrubs with the finest sprouts possible, and left
the goat to devour them. In the evening, when he came to lead her
home, he said, "Well, goat, are you full?" And the goat answered,
"I am so full, I cannot pull
Another blade of grass— ba! baa!"
"Then come home," said the youth; and he took her to her stall, and fastened her up.
"Now," said the old tailor, "has the goat had her proper food?"
"Oh," answered the son, "she is so full, she no more can pull." But the tailor, not trusting his word, went to the goat and said,
"My dear goat, are you really full?" The malicious animal answered,
"How can I be full? There was nothing to pull.
Though I looked all about me—ba! baar
"Oh, the wretchesl" cried the tailor; "the one as good-for-nothing and careless as the other. I will no longer have such fools about
me"; and rushing back, in his wrath he laid about him with his
yard-wand, and belabored his son's back so immercifully that he ran away out of the house.
So the old tailor was left alone with the goat. The next day he
went out to the stall, and let out the goat, saying, "Come, my dear
creature, I will take you myself to the willows." So he led her by the string, and brought her to the green hedges
and pastures where there was plenty of food to her taste, and saying to her, "Now, for once, you can eat to your heart's content," he
lyo Grimms Complete Fairy Tales
left her there till the evening. Then he returned, and said, "Well,
goat, are you full?" She answered,
"I am so full, I cannot pull
Another blade of grass— ba! baal"
"Then come home," said the tailor, and leading her to her stall, he fastened her up.
Before he left her he turned once more, saying, "Now then, for
once you are fuU." But the goat actually cried,
"How can I be full? There was nothing to pull,
Though I looked all about me—bal baaF'
When the tailor heard that he marveled, and saw at once that his
three sons had been sent away without reason. "Wait a minute,"
cried he, "you ungrateful creaturel It is not enough merely to drive you away— I wiU teach you to show your face again among honorable tailors." So in haste he went and fetched his razor, and seizing the goat he
shaved her head as smooth as the palm of his hand. And as the
yard-measure was too honorable a weapon, he took the whip and
fetched her such a crack that with many a jump and spring she ran
away.
The tailor felt very sad as he sat alone in his house, and would
willingly have had his sons back again, but no one knew where
they had gone.
The eldest son, when he was driven from home, apprenticed himself to a joiner, and he applied himself diligently to his trade, and
when the time came for him to travel, his master gave him a little
table, nothing much to look at, and made of common wood; but it
had one great quality. When any one set it down and said, "Table,
be covered!" all at once the good little table had a clean cloth on it, and a plate, and knife, and fork, and dishes with roast and boiled
meat, and a large glass of red wine sparkHng so as to cheer the
heart. The young apprentice thought he was set up for life, and he
went merrily out into the world, and never cared whether an inn
were good or bad, or whether he could get anything to eat there or
not. When he was hungry, it did not matter where he was, whether
in the fields, in the woods, or in a meadow, he set down his table
and said, "Be covered!" and there he was provided with everything that heart could wish. At last it occurred to him that he would go
The Table, the Ass, and the Stick 171
back to his father, whose wrath might by this time have subsided,
and perhaps because of the wonderful table he might receive him
again gladly.
It happened that one evening during his journey home he came
to an inn that was quite full of guests, who bade him welcome, and
asked him to sit down with them and eat, as otherwise he would
have found some difficulty in getting anything. "No," answered the
young joiner, "I could not think of depriving you; you had much
better be my guests." Then they laughed, and thought he must be joking. But he
brought his Httle wooden table, and put it in the middle of the
room, and said, "Table, be covered!" Immediately it was set out with food much better than the landlord had been able to provide,
and the good smell of it greeted the noses of the guests very
agreeably. "Fall to, good friends," said the joiner; and the guests, when they saw how it was, needed no second asking, but taking up
knife and fork fell to valiantly. And what seemed most wonderful
was that when a dish was empty inmiediately a fuU one stood in its
place. All the while the landlord stood in a comer, and watched all
that went on. He could not teU what to say about it; but he thought
"such cooking as that would make my inn prosper." The joiner and his fellowship kept it up very merrily until late at
night. At last they went to sleep, and the young joiner, going to
bed, left his wishing-table standing against the wall. The landlord,
however, could not sleep for thinking of the table, and he remembered that there was in his lumber room an old table very Uke it, so
he fetched it, and taking away the joiner s table, he left the other in
its place. The next morning the joiner paid his reckoning, took up
the table, not dreaming that he was carrying off the wrong one, and
went on his way. About noon he reached home, and his father received him with great joy.
"Now, my dear son, what have you learned?" said he to him. "I
have learned to be a joiner, father," he answered.
"That is a good trade," returned the father; "but what have you
brought back with you from your travels?" "The best thing I've got,
father, is this little table," said he.
The tailor looked at it on all sides, and said, "You have certainly
produced no masterpiece. It is a rubbishing old table."
"But it is a very wonderful one," answered the son. "When I set it down, and tell it to be covered, at once the finest meats are standing on it, and wine so good that it cheers the heart. Let us invite all
172 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
the friends and neighbors, that they may feast and enjoy themselves,
for the table will provide enough for all." When the company was all assembled, he put his table in the
middle of the room, and commanded it, "Table, be covered!" But the table never stirred, and remained just as empty as any
other table that does not understand talking. When the poor joiner
saw that the table remained unfurnished, he felt ashamed to stand
there like a fool. The company laughed at him freely, and were
obliged to return unfilled and uncheered to their houses. The father
gathered his pieces together and returned to his tailoring, and the son went to work under another master.
The second son had bound himself apprentice to a miller. And
when his time was up, his master said to him, "As you have be- haved yourself so well, I will give you an ass of a remarkable kind:
he will draw no cart, and carry no sack." "What is the good of him
then?" asked the yoimg apprentice. "He spews forth gold," answered the miller. 'If you put a cloth before him and say, 'Bricklebrit,' out come gold pieces from back and front."
"That is a capital thing," said the apprentice, and thanking his master, he went out into the world. Whenever he wanted gold he
had only to say "Bricklebrit" to his ass, and there was a shower of gold pieces, and so he had no cares as he traveled about. Wherever
he came he lived on the best, and the dearer the better, as his purse
was always fuU. And when he had been looking about him about
the world a long time, he thought he would go and find out his father, who would perhaps forget his anger and receive him kindly
because of his gold ass.
And it happened that he came to lodge in the same inn where his
brother s table had been exchanged. He was leading his ass in his
hand, and the landlord was for taking the ass from him to tie it up,
but the young apprentice said, "Don't trouble yourself, old fellow, I will take him into the stable myself and tie him up, and then I shall
know where to find him."
The landlord thought this was very strange, and he never supposed that a man who was accustomed to look after his ass himself
could have much to spend; but when the stranger, feeling in his
pocket, took out two gold pieces and told him to get him something
good for supper, the landlord stared, and ran and fetched the best
that could be got. After supper the guest called the reckoning, and
the landlord, wanting to get all the profit he could, said that it
would amount to two gold pieces more. The apprentice felt in his
pocket, but his gold had come to an end.
The Table, the Ass, and the Stick 173
"Wait a moment, landlord," said he, "I will go and fetch some
money," and he went out of the room, carrying the tablecloth with him. The landlord could not tell what to make of it, and, curious to
know his proceedings, slipped after him, and as the guest shut the
stable-door, he peeped in through a knothole. Then he saw how the
stranger spread the cloth before the ass, saying, "Bricklebrit," and directly the ass let gold pieces fall from back and front, so that it
rained down money upon the ground.
"Dear me," said the landlord, "that is an easy way of getting
ducats; a purse of money like that is no bad thing." After that the guest paid his reckoning and went to bed; but the
landlord slipped down to the stable in the middle of the night, led
the gold ass away, and tied up another ass in his place. The next
morning early the apprentice set forth with his ass, never doubting
that it was the right one. By noon he came to his father's house, who was rejoiced to see him again, and received him gladly.
"What trade have you taken up, my son?" asked the father. "I
am a miller, dear father," answered he.
"What have you brought home from your travels?" continued the
father. "Nothing but an ass," answered the son.
"We have plenty of asses here," said the father. "You had much
better have brought me a nice goat!" "Yes," answered the son, "but
this is no common ass. When I say, 'Bricklebrit,' the good creature spits out a whole clothful of gold pieces. Let me call all the neighbors together. I will make rich people of them all." "That will be fine!" said the tailor. "Then I need labor no more
at my needle"; and he rushed out himself and called the neighbors together. As soon as they were all assembled, the miller called out
to them to make room, and brought in the ass, and spread his cloth before him.
"Now, pay attention," said he, and cried, "Bricklebritl" but no gold pieces came, and that showed that the animal was not more
scientific than any other ass.
So the poor miller made a long face when he saw that he had
been taken in, and begged pardon of the neighbors, who all went
home as poor as they had come. And there was nothing for it but
that the old man must take to his needle again, and that the young one should take service with a miller.
The third brother had bound himself apprentice to a turner; and
as turning is a very ingenious handicraft, it took him a long time to
learn it. His brothers told him in a letter how badly things had
gone with them, and how on the last night of their travels the land-
174 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
lord deprived them of their treasures. When the young turner had
learnt his trade, and was ready to travel, his master, to reward him
for his good conduct, gave him a sack, and told him that there was a stick inside it.
"I can hang up the sack, and it may be very useful to me," said
the young man. "But what is the good of the stick?"
"I will tell you," answered the master. "If any one does you any
harm, and you say, 'Stick, out of the sack!' the stick will jump out upon them, and will belabor them so soundly that they shaU not be
able to move or to leave the place for a week, and it will not stop
until you say, 'Stick, into the sack!'" The apprentice thanked him, and took up the sack and started on
his travels, and when any one attacked him he would say, "Stick,
out of the sack!" and directly out jumped the stick, and dealt a shower of blows on the coat or jerkin, and the back beneath, which
quickly ended the affair. One evening the young turner reached the
inn where his two brothers had been taken in. He laid his knapsack
on the table, and began to describe all the wonderful things he had seen in the world.
"Yes," said he, "you may talk of your self-spreading table, gold- supplying ass, and so forth; very good things, I do not deny, but
they are nothing in comparison with the treasure that I have acquired and carry with me in that sackl"
Then the landlord opened his ears. "What in the world can it
be?" thought he. "Very likely the sack is full of precious stones; and
I have a perfect right to it, for all good things come in threes." When bedtime came the guest stretched himself on a bench, and
put his sack under his head for a pillow, and the landlord, when he
thought the young man was sound asleep, came, and, stooping
down, pulled gently at the sack, so as to remove it cautiously, and
put another in its place. The turner had only been waiting for this
to happen, and just as the landlord was giving a last courageous
pull, he cried, "Stick, out of the sackl" Out flew the stick directly,
and laid to heartily on the landlord's back; and in vain he begged for mercy; the louder he cried the harder the stick beat time on his
back, until he fell exhausted to the ground.
Then the turner said, "If you do not give me the table and the
ass directly, this game shall begin all over again."
"Oh dear, nol" cried the landlord, quite collapsed; "1 will gladly give it all back again if you will only make this terrible goblin go
back into the sack."
Then said the yoimg man, "I will be generous instead of just.
The Table, the Ass, and the Stick 175
but bewarel" Then he cried, "Stick, into the sack!" and left him in peace.
The next morning the turner set out with the table and the ass on
his way home to his father. The tailor was very glad indeed to see
him again, and asked him what he had learned abroad. "My dear
father," answered he, "I am become a turner."
"A very ingenious handicraft," said the father. "And what have
you brought with you from your travels?" "A very valuable thing,
dear father," answered the son. "A stick in a sackl"
"What!" cried the father. "A stick! The thing is not worth so
much trouble when you can cut one from any tree."
"But it is not a common stick, dear father," said the young man.
"When I say, 'Stick, out of the bag!' out jumps the stick upon any one who means harm to me, and makes him dance again, and does
not leave oflE till he is beaten to the earth, and asks pardon. Just
look here, with this stick I have recovered the table and the ass
which the thieving landlord had taken from my two brothers. Now,
let them both be sent for, and bid all the neighbors too, and they
shall eat and drink to their hearts' content, and I will fill their
pockets with gold." The old tailor could not quite believe in such a thing, but he
called his sons and aU the neighbors together. Then the turner
brought in the ass, opened a cloth before him, and said to his
brother, "Now, my dear brother, speak to him." And the miller
said, "Bricklebrit!" and immediately the cloth was covered with gold pieces, until they had all got more than they could carry away.
( I tell you this because it is a pity you were not there. ) Then the
turner set down the table, and said, "Now, my dear brother, speak
to it." And the joiner said, 'Table, be covered!" and directly it was covered, and set forth plentifully with the richest dishes. Then they
held a feast such as had never taken place in the tailor's house be- fore, and the whole company remained through the night, merry and content.
The tailor after that locked up in a cupboard his needle and
thread, his yard-measure and goose, and lived ever after with his
three sons in great joy and splendor.
But what became of the goat, the imlucky cause of the tailor's sons being driven out? I will tell you. She felt so ashamed of her
bald head that she ran into a fox's hole and hid herself. When the fox came home he caught sight of two great eyes staring at him out
of the darkness, and was very frightened and ran away. A bear met
176 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
him, and seeing that he looked very disturbed, asked him, "What is
the matter, brother fox, that you should look like that?"
"Oh dear," answered the fox, "a grisly beast is sitting in my hole,
and he stared at me with fiery eyes I"
"We will soon drive him out," said the bear; and went to the hole and looked in, but when he caught sight of the fiery eyes he likewise felt great terror seize him, and not wishing to have anything to
do with so grisly a beast, he made o£F. He was soon met by a bee,
who remarked that he had not a very courageous air, and said to
him, "Bear, you have a very depressed countenance, what has become of yoiu: high spirit?"
"You may well ask," answered the bear. *ln the fox's hole there
sits a grisly beast with fiery eyes, and we cannot drive him out."
The bee answered, "I know you despise me, bear. I am a poor
feeble little creature, but I think I can help you."
So she flew into the fox's hole, and settling on the goat's smoothshaven head, stung her so severely that she jimiped up, crying, "Ba- baal" and ran out like mad into the world. And to this hour no one knows where she ran to.
One-Eye, Two-Eyes, and Three-Eyes
There was once a woman who had three daughters, the eldest of
whom was called One-eye, because she had only one eye in the
middle of her forehead, and the second. Two-eyes, because she had
two eyes like other folks, and the youngest, Three-eyes, because she
had three eyes; and her third eye was also in the center of her forehead. However, as Two-eyes saw just as other human beings did,
her sisters and her mother could not endure her. They said to her,
"Thou, with thy two eyes, art no better than the common people;
thou dost not belong to us I" They pushed her about, and threw old clothes to her, and gave her nothing to eat but what they left, and
did everything that they could to make her unhappy. It came to
pass that Two-eyes had to go out into the fields and tend the goat,
but she was stiU quite hungry, because her sisters had given her so
little to eat. So she sat down on a ridge and began to weep, and so
bitterly that two streams ran down from her eyes.
And once when she looked up in her grief, a woman was stand-
One-Eye, Two-Eyes, and Three-Eyes 177
ing beside her, who said, "Why art thou weeping, little Two-eyes?"
Two-eyes answered, "Have I not reason to weep, when I have two eyes like other people, and my sisters and mother hate me for it,
and push me from one comer to another, throw old clothes at me,
and give me nothing to eat but the scraps they leave? Today they
have given me so little that I am still quite hungry." Then the wise
woman said, "Wipe away thy tears. Two-eyes, and I will tell thee something to stop thee ever suffering from hunger again. Just say to
thy goat,
'Bleat, my little goat, bleat.
Cover the table with something to eat',
and then a clean well-spread little table will stand before thee, with
the most delicious food upon it of which thou mayst eat as much as
thou art inclined for, and when thou hast had enough, and hast no
more need of the little table, just say,
'Bleat, bleat, my little goat, I pray. And take the table quite away,
and then it will vanish again from thy sight." Hereupon the wise woman departed.
But Two-eyes thought, "I must instantly make a trial, and see if
what she said is true, for I am far too hungry," and she said,
"Bleat, my little goat, bleat.
Cover the table with something to eat,"
and scarcely had she spoken the words than a little table, covered
with a white cloth, was standing there, and on it was a plate with a
knife and fork, and a silver spoon; and the most delicious food was
there also, warm and smoking as if it had just come out of the
kitchen. Then Two-eyes said the shortest prayer she knew, 'Xord
God, be with us always. Amen," and helped herself to some food, and enjoyed it. And when she was satisfied, she said, as the wise
woman had taught her,
"Bleat, bleat, my little goat, I pray.
And take the table quite away,"
and immediately the little table and everything on it was gone
again. "That is a delightful way of keeping house I" thought Two- eyes, and was quite glad and happy.
In the evening, when she went home with her goat, she foimd a
small earthenware dish with some food, which her sisters had set
ready for her, but she did not touch it. Next day she again went out
178 Grimms Complete Fairy Tales
with, her goat, and left the few bits of broken bread which had
been handed to her, lying untouched. The first and second time
that she did this, her sisters did not remark it at all, but as it happened every time, they did observe it, and said, "There is some- thing wrong about Two-eyes, she always leaves her food untasted, and she used to eat up everything that was given her; she must
have discovered other ways of getting food." In order that they might learn the truth, they resolved to send One-eye with Two-eyes
when she went to drive her goat to the pasture, to observe what
Two-eyes did when she was there, and whether any one brought
her anything to eat and drink. So when Two-eyes set out the next
time, One-eye went to her and said, "I will go with you to the pas- ture, and see that the goat is well taken care of, and driven where
there is food."
But Two-eyes knew what was in One-eye's mind, and drove the
goat into high grass and said, "Come, One-eye, we will sit down,
and I will sing something to you." One-eye sat down and was tired with the unaccustomed walk and the heat of the sun, and Two-eyes
sang constantly,
"One eye, wakest thou?
One eye, sleepest thouF'
until One-eye shut her one eye, and fell asleep, and as soon as Twoeyes saw that One-eye was fast asleep, and could discover nothing, she said,
"Bleat, my little goat, bleat.
Cover the table with something to eat,"
and seated herself at her table, and ate and drank imtil she was
satisfied, and then she again cried,
"Bleat, bleat, my little goat, I pray,
And take the table quite away"
and in an instant all was gone.
Two-eyes now awakened One-eye, and said, "One-eye, you want to take care of the goat, and go to sleep while you are doing it, and
in the meantime the goat might run all over the world. Come, let us
go home again." So they went home, and again Two-eyes let her lit- tle dish stand untouched, and One-eye could not tell her mother
why she would not eat it, and to excuse herself said, "I fell asleep
when I was out."
Next day the mother said to Three-eyes, "This time you shall go
One-Eye, Two-Eyes, and Three-Eyes 179
and observe if Two-eyes eats anything when she is out, and if any
one fetches her food and drink, for she must eat and drink in secret." So Three-eyes went to Two-eyes, and said, "I will go with you and see if the goat is taken proper care of, and driven where
there is food."
But Two-eyes knew what was in Three-eyes' mind, and drove the
goat into high grass and said, "We v^ll sit down, and I will sing
something to you. Three-eyes." Three-eyes sat down and was tired with the walk and with the heat of the sun, and Two-eyes began
the same song as before, and sang,
"Three eyes, are you loakingF'
but then, instead of singing,
"Three eyes, are you sleeping?"
as she ought to have done, she thoughtlessly sang,
"Two eyes, are you sleeping?"
and sang all the time,
"Three eyes, are you waking?
Two eyes, are you sleeping?'
Then two of the eyes which Three-eyes had, shut and fell asleep,
but the third, as it had not been named in the song, did not sleep.
It is true that Three-eyes shut it, but only in her cunning, to pretend it was asleep too, but it blinked, and could see everything very
well. And when Two-eyes thought that Three-eyes was fast asleep, she used her httle charm:
"Bleat, my little goat, bleat.
Cover the table with something to eat,"
and ate and drank as much as her heart desired, and then ordered
the table to go away again:
"Bleat, bleat, my little goat, I pray.
And take the table quite away,"
and Three-eyes had seen everything.
Then Two-eyes came to her, waked her and said, "Have you been asleep. Three-eyes? You are a good care-taker! Come, we will
go home." And when they got home, Two-eyes again did not eat,
and Three-eyes said to the mother, "Now, I know why that high-
i8o Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
minded thing there does not eat. When she is out, she says to the
goat,
'Bleat, my little goat, bleat.
Cover the table with something to eat'
and then a little table appears before her covered with the best of
food, much better than any we have here, and when she has eaten
all she wants, she says,
'Bleat, bleat, my little goat, I pray.
And take the table quite away.'
and all disappears. I watched everything closely. She put two of my
eyes to sleep by using a certain form of words, but luckily the one
in my forehead kept awake."
Then the envious mother cried, "Dost thou want to fare better
than we do? The desire shall pass away," and she fetched a
butcher's knife, and thrust it into the heart of the goat, which fell dovm dead.
When Two-eyes saw that, she went out full of trouble, seated herself on the ridge of grass at the edge of the field, and wept bitter
tears. Suddenly the wise woman once more stood by her side, and
said, "Two-eyes, why art thou weeping?" "Have I not reason to
weep?" she answered. "The goat which covered the table for me every day when I spoke yom: charm, has been killed by my mother,
and now I shall again have to bear hunger and want." The v^dse
woman said, "Two-eyes, I will give thee a piece of good advice; ask thy sisters to give thee the entrails of the slaughtered goat, and
bury them in the ground in front of the house, and thy fortune will
be made." Then she vanished, and Two-eyes went home and said to
her sisters, "Dear sisters, do give me some part of my goat; I don't
wish for what is good, but give me the entrails." Then they laughed
and said, "If that's all you want, you can have it." So Two-eyes took the entrails and buried them quietly in the evening, in front of the
house-door, as the vwse woman had counseled her to do.
Next morning, when they all awoke, and went to the house-door,
there stood a strangely magnificent tree with leaves of silver, and
fruit of gold hanging among them, so that in all the v^dde world
there was nothing more beautiful or precious. They did not know
how the tree could have come there during the night, but Two-eyes
saw that it had grown up out of the entrails of the goat, for it was
standing on the exact spot where she had buried them.
Then the mother said to One-eye, "Climb up, my child, and
One-Eye, Two-Eyes, and Three-Eyes 181
gather some of the fruit of the tree for us." One-eye climbed up, but when she was about to get hold of one of the golden apples,
the branch escaped from her hands, and that happened each time,
so that she could not pluck a single apple, let her do what she
might. Then said the mother, "Three-eyes, do you climb up; you
with your three eyes can look about you better than One-eye." One- eye slipped down, and Three-eyes climbed up. Three-eyes was not more sldlful, and might search as she liked, but the golden apples
always escaped her. At length the mother grew impatient, and
climbed up herself, but could get hold of the fruit no better than
One-eye and Three-eyes, for she always clutched empty air.
Then said Two-eyes, *T will just go up, perhaps I may succeed
better." The sisters cried, "You indeed, with your two eyes, what
can you do?" But Two-eyes climbed up, and the golden apples did not get out of her way, but came into her hand of their own accord,
so that she could pluck them one after the other, and she brought a
whole apronful down with her. The mother took them away from
her, and instead of treating poor Two-eyes any better for this, she
and One-eye and Three-eyes were only envious, because Two-eyes
alone had been able to get the fruit, and they treated her still more
cruelly.
It so happened that once when they were all standing together
by the tree, a young knight came up. "Quick, Two-eyes," cried the
two sisters, "creep under this, and don't disgrace usl" and with all speed they turned an empty barrel which was standing close by the
tree over poor Two-eyes, and they pushed the golden apples which
she had been gathering under it too. When the knight came nearer
he was a handsome lord, who stopped and admired the magnificent
gold and silver tree, and said to the two sisters, "To whom does this fine tree belong? Any one who would bestow one branch of it on
me might in return for it ask whatsoever he desired." Then One-eye and Three-eyes replied that the tree belonged to them, and that
they would give him a branch. They both took great trouble, but
they were not able to do it, for the branches and fruit both moved
away from them every time.
Then said the knight, 'Tt is very strange that the tree should be- long to you, and that you should still not be able to break a piece
off." They again asserted that the tree was their property. While they were saying so, Two-eyes rolled out a couple of golden apples from under the barrel to the feet of the knight, for she was vexed
with One-eye and Three-eyes, for not speaking the truth. When the
knight saw the apples he was astonished, and asked where they
i82 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
came from. One-eye and Three-eyes answered that they had another sister, who was not allowed to show herself, for she had only
two eyes like any common person. The knight, however, desired to
see her, and cried, "Two-eyes, come forth." Then Two-eyes, quite comforted, came from beneath the barrel,
and the knight was surprised at her great beauty, and said, "Thou,
Two-eyes, canst certainly break off a branch from the tree for me."
"Yes," repHed Two-eyes, "that I certainly shall be able to do, for
the tree belongs to me." And she climbed up, and with the greatest ease broke ofiF a branch with beautiful silver leaves and golden
fruit, and gave it to the knight. Then said the knight, "Two-eyes,
what shall I give thee for it?" "Alasl" answered Two-eyes, "1 suffer from hunger and thirst, grief and want, from early morning till late
night; if you would take me with you, and deHver me from these
things, I should be happy." So the knight lifted Two-eyes on to his
horse, and took her home with him to his father's castle, and there
he gave her beautiful clothes, and meat and drink to her heart's content, and as he loved her so much he married her, and the wedding was solemnized with great rejoicing.
When Two-eyes was thus carried away by the handsome knight,
her two sisters grudged her good fortune in downright earnest.
"The wonderful tree, however, still remains with us," thought they,
"and even if we can gather no fruit from it, still every one will stand still and look at it, and come to us and admire it. Who knows
what good things may be in store for us?" But next morning, the tree had vanished, and all their hopes were at an end. And when
Two-eyes looked out of the window of her own little room, to her
great delight it was standing in front of it, and so it had followed her.
Two-eyes Hved a long time in happiness. Once two poor women came to her in her castle, and begged for alms. She looked in their
faces, and recognized her sisters. One-eye and Three-eyes, who had
fallen into such poverty that they had to wander about and beg
their bread from door to door. Two-eyes, however, made them wel- come, and was kind to them, and took care of them, so that they
both with all their hearts repented the evil that they had done their
sister in their youth.
The Knapsack, the Hat, and the Horn
Once there webe three brothers, and they grew poorer and poorer,
until at last their need was so great that they had nothing left to
bite or to break. Then they said, "This will not do; we had better
go out into the world and seek our fortune." So they set out, and went some distance through many green
fields, but they met with no good fortune. One day they came to a
great wood, in the midst of which was a hill, and when they came
near to it, they saw that it was all of silver. Then said the eldest,
"Now here is good fortune enough for me, and I desire no better." And he took of the silver as much as he could carry, turned round,
and went back home. But the other two said, "We must have something better than mere silver," and they would not touch it, but went on farther.
After they had gone on a few days longer, they came to a hill
that was all of gold. The second brother stood still and considered,
and was imcertain. "What shall I do?" said he; "shall I take of the
gold enough to last me my life, or shall I go farther?" At last, com- ing to a conclusion, he filled his pockets as full as they would hold,
bid good-bye to his brother, and went home. But the third brother
said to himself, "Silver and gold do not tempt me; I wiU not gainsay fortune, who has better things in store for me." So he went on, and when he had journeyed for three days, he
came to a wood still greater than the former ones, so that there was
no end to it; and in it he found nothing to eat or to drink, so that he
was nearly starving. He got up into a high tree, so as to see how far
the wood reached, but as far as his eyes could see, there was nothing but the tops of the trees. And as he got down from the tree,
hunger pressed him sore, and he thought, "Oh that for once I could
have a good meall" And when he reached the ground he saw to his surprise a table
beneath the tree richly spread with food, and that smoked before him.
"This time at least," said he, "I have my wish," and without stop- ping to ask who had brought the meal there, and who had cooked
it, he came close to the table and ate with relish, until his hunger
was appeased. When he had finished, he thought, "It would be a
184 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
pity to leave such a good table-cloth behind in the wood," so he folded it up neatly and pocketed it.
Then he walked on, and in the evening, when hunger again
seized him, he thought he would put the table-cloth to the proof,
and he brought it out and said, "Now I desire that thou shouldst be
spread with a good meal," and no sooner were the words out of his
'mouth, than there stood on it as many dishes of delicious food as there was room for.
"Now that I see," said he, "what sort of a cook thou art, I hold
thee dearer than the mountains of silver and of gold," for he per- ceived that it was a wishing-cloth. Still he was not satisfied to settle
/down at home with only a wishing-cloth, so he determined to wander farther through the world and seek his fortune.
One evening, in a lonely wood, he came upon a begrimed charcoal-burner at his furnace, who had put some potatoes to roast for
his supper. "Good evening, my black feUow," said he, "how do you
get on in this lonely spot?" "One day is like another," answered the
charcoal-burner; "every evening I have potatoes; have you a mind
to be my guest?" "Many thanks," answered the traveler, "I will not deprive you; you did not expect a guest; but if you do not object,
you shall be the one to be invited."
"How can that be managed?" said the charcoal-bmner; "I see that you have nothing with you, and if you were to walk two hours
in any direction, you would meet with no one to give you anything." "For aU that," answered he, "there shall be a feast so good,
that you have never tasted the like." Then he took out the table-cloth from his knapsack, and spreading
it on the ground, said, "Cloth, be covered," and immediately there appeared boiled and roast meat, quite hot, as if it had just come
from the kitchen. The charcoat-bumer stared, but did not stay to be
asked twice, and fell to, filling his black mouth with ever bigger
and bigger pieces.
When they had finished eating, the charcoal-burner smiled, and
said, "Look here, I approve of your table-cloth; it would not be a bad thing for me to have here in the wood, where the cooking is
not first-rate. I will strike a bargain with you. There hangs a soldier's knapsack in the corner, which looks old and unsightly, but it has wonderful qualities; as I have no further occasion for it, I wiU
give it to you in exchange for the table-cloth."
"First, I must know what these wonderful quahties are," re- turned the other.
"I will tell you," answered the charcoal-burner; "if you strike it
The Knapsack, the Hat, and the Horn 185
with your hand, there will appear a corporal and six men with
swords and muskets, and whatever you wish to have done, that will
they do."
"Well, for my part," said the other, "I am quite willing to make
the exchange." And he gave the table-cloth to the charcoal-burner, took down the knapsack from its hook, slung it over his shoulder,
and took his leave. Before he had gone far he began to want to
make a trial of his wonderful knapsack, so he struck it a blow. At
once seven soldiers appeared before him, and the corporal said,
"What does my lord and master please to want?"
"March in haste to the charcoal-burner and demand my wishingcloth back," said the man. They wheeled round to the left, and were not long before they had accomplished his desire, and taken
away, without wasting many words, the wishing-cloth from the
charcoal-burner. Having dismissed them, he wandered on, expecting still more wonderful luck.
About sunset he fell in with another charcoal-burner, who was
getting his supper ready at the fire. "Will you join me?" said this
black fellow; "potatoes and salt, without butter; sit down to it with
me." "No," answered he, "this time you shall be my guest." And he spread out his table-cloth, and it was directly covered with the
most delicious victuals. So they ate and drank together and were
merry.
After the meal was over the charcoal-burner said, "Over there, on the bench, lies an old worn-out hat, which has wonderful properties : if you put it on and draw it well over yoiu* head it is as if a dozen field-pieces went off, one after the other, shooting everything
down, so that no one can stand against them. This hat is of no use
to me, and I will give it to you in exchange for the table-cloth."
"All right," answered the other, taking the hat and carrying it off, and leaving the table-cloth behind him. Before he had gone far he
struck upon the knapsack, and summoned his soldiers to fetch back
the table-cloth again. "First one thing, and then another," thought
he, "just as if my luck were never to end."
And so it seemed, for at the end of another day's journey he came up to another charcoal-burner, who was roasting his potatoes just
like the others. He invited him to eat with him off his wishing-cloth,
to which the charcoal-burner took such a fancy, that he gave him
for it a horn, which had different properties still from the hat. If a
man blew on it, down fell all walls and fortresses, and finally towns
and villages in heaps. So the man gave the table-cloth in exchange
for it to the charcoal-burner, afterwards sending his men to fetch it
i86 GrimnCs Complete Fairy Tales
back, so that at last he had in his possession knapsack, hat, and
horn, all at one time. "Now," said he, "I am a made man, and it is
time to go home again and see how my brothers are faring." When he reached home he found that his brothers had built
themselves a fine house with their silver and gold, and Hved in
clover. He went to see them, but because he wore a half-worn-out
coat, a shabby hat, and the old knapsack on his back, they would
not recognize him as their brother. They mocked him and said, "It is of no use your giving yourself out to be our brother; he who
scorned silver and gold, seeking for better fortune, will return in
great splendor, as a mighty King, not as a beggar-man." And they drove him from their door.
Then he flew into a great rage, and struck upon his knapsack
until a hundred and fifty men stood before him, rank and file. He
ordered them to smround his brothers' house, and that two of them should take hazel-rods, and should beat the brothers until they
knew who he was. And there arose a terrible noise; the people ran
together and wished to rescue the brothers in their extremity, but
they could do nothing against the soldiers. It happened at last that
the King of the coimtry heard of it, and he was indignant, and sent
a captain with his troops to drive the disturber of the peace out of
the town. But the man with his knapsack soon assembled a greater
company, who beat back the captain and his people, sending them
ofiF with bleeding noses.
Then the King said, "This vagabond fellow must be put down," and he sent the next day a larger company against him, but they
could do nothing, for he assembled more men than ever, and in
order to bring them more quickly, he pulled his hat twice lower
over his brows; then the heavy guns came into play, and the King's
people were beaten and put to flight. "Now," said he, "I shall not make peace until the King gives me his daughter to wife, and lets
me rule the whole kingdom in his name." This he caused to be told to the King, who said to his daughter,
"This is a hard nut to crack; there is no choice but for me to do as he asks; if I wish to have peace and keep the crown on my head, I
must give in to him."
So the wedding took place, but the King's daughter was angry that the bridegroom should be a common man, who wore a shabby
hat, and carried an old knapsack. She wished very much to get rid
of him, and thought day and night how to manage it. Then it struck
her that perhaps all his wonder-working power lay in the knapsack,
and she pretended to be very fond of him, and when she had
Sweetheart Roland 187
brought him into a good humor she said, "Pray lay aside that ugly
knapsack; it misbecomes you so much that I feel ashamed of you."
"My dear child," answered he, "this knapsack is my greatest treasure; so long as I keep it I need not fear anything in the whole
world," and then he showed her with what wonderful qualities it was endowed. Then she fell on his neck as if she would have kissed
him, but, by a clever trick, she slipped the knapsack over his shoul- der and ran away with it.
As soon as she was alone she struck upon it and summoned the
soldiers, and bade them seize her husband and bring him to the
King's palace. They obeyed, and the false woman had many more to follow behind, so as to be ready to drive him out of the country.
He would have been quite done for if he had not still kept the hat.
As soon as he could get his hands free he pulled it twice forward on
his head; and then the cannon began to thunder and beat all down,
till at last the King's daughter had to come and to beg pardon. And as she so movingly prayed and promised to behave better, he raised
her up and made peace with her. Then she grew very land to him,
and seemed to love him very much, and he grew so deluded, that
one day he confided to her that even if he were deprived of his
knapsack nothing could be done against him as long as he should
keep the old hat. And when she knew the secret she waited until he
had gone to sleep; then she carried off the hat, and had him driven
out into the streets. Still the horn remained to him, and in great
wrath he blew a great blast upon it, and down came walls and
fortresses, towns and villages, and bmried the King and his daughter among their ruins. If he had not set down the horn when he did,
and if he had blown a little longer, all the houses would have tumbled down, and there would not have been left one stone upon an- other.
After this no one dared to withstand him, and he made himself
King over the whole country.
Sweetheart Roland
There was once a woman who was a witch, and she had two
daughters, one ugly and wicked, one pretty and good. She loved
the wicked one because she was her own child, but she hated the
i88 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
good one because she was a step-daughter. One day the stepdaughter put on a pretty apron, which the other daughter hked so
much that she became envious, and said to her mother that she
must and should have the apron.
"Be content, my child," said the old woman, "thou shalt have it. Thy step-sister has long deserved death, and tonight, while she is
asleep, I shall come and cut off her head. Take care to he at the farthest side of the bed, and push her to the outside." And it would have been all over with the poor girl, if she had not
been standing in a corner near and heard it all. She did not dare to
go outside the door the whole day long, and when bed-time came the other one got into bed first, so as to He on the farthest side; but
when she had gone to sleep, the step-daughter pushed her towards the outside, and took the inside place next the wall. In the night the
old woman came sneaking; in her right hand she held an axe, and
with her left she felt for the one who was lying outside, and then
she heaved up the axe with both hands, and hewed the head off her
only daughter.
When she had gone away, the other girl got up and went to her
sweetheart's, who was called Roland, and knocked at his door.
When he came to her, she said, "Listen, dear Roland, we must flee away in all haste; my step-mother meant to put me to death, but she has killed her only child instead. When the day breaks, and she
sees what she has done, we are lost."
"But' I advise you," said Roland, "to bring away her magic wand with you; otherwise we cannot escape her when she comes after to
overtake us." So the maiden fetched the magic wand, and she took up the head of her step-sister and let drop three drops of blood on
the ground— one by the bed, one in the kitchen, and one on the
steps. Then she hastened back to her sweetheart.
When the old witch got up in the morning, she called out to her
daughter, to give her the apron, but no daughter came. Then she
cried out, "Where art thou?" "Here, at the steps, sweeping!" an- swered one of the drops of blood.
The old woman went out, but she saw nobody at the steps, and
cried again, "Where art thou?" "Here in the kitchen warming myself," cried the second drop of blood. So she went into the kitchen and found no one. Then she cried
again, "Where art thou?" "Oh, here in bed fast asleepl" cried the third drop of blood.
Then the mother went into the room, and up to the bed, and
there lay her only child, whose head she had cut off herself. The
Sweetheart Roland 189
witch fell into a great fury, rushed to the window, for from it she
could see far and wide, and she caught sight of her step-daughter,
hastening away with her dear Roland.
*lt will be no good to you," cried she, "if you get ever so far
away, you cannot escape me." Then she put on her boots, which
took her an hour's walk at every stride, and it was not long before she had overtaken them. But the maiden, when she saw the old
woman striding up, changed, by means of the magic wand, her
dear Roland into a lake, and herself into a duck swimming upon it.
The witch stood on the bank and threw in crumbs of bread, and
took great pains to decoy the duck towards her, but the duck would
not be decoyed, and the old woman was obHged to go back in the
evening disappointed.
Then the maiden and her dear Roland took again their natural
shapes, and traveled on the whole night through until daybreak.
Then the maiden changed herself into a beautiful flower, standing
in the middle of a hedge of thorns, and her dear Roland into a
fiddle-player. It was not long before the witch came striding up,
and she said to the musician, "Dear musician, will you be so kind
as to reach that pretty flower for me?" "Oh yes," said he, "I will
strike up a tune to it." Then as she crept quickly up to the hedge to break off the flower,
for she knew well who it was, he began to play, and whether she
hked it or not, she was obliged to dance, for there was magic in the
tune. The faster he played the higher she had to jump, and the
thorns tore her clothes, and scratched and wounded her, and he did
not cease playing until she was spent, and lay dead.
So now they were saved, and Roland said, "I will go to my father
and prepare for the wedding." "And I will stay here," said the
maiden, "and wait for you, and so that no one should know me, I
will change myself into a red milestone." So away went Roland, and the maiden in the Hkeness of a stone waited in the field for her
beloved.
But when Roland went home he fell into the snares of another
maiden, who wrought so, that he forgot his first love. And the poor
girl waited a long time, but at last, seeing that he did not come, she
was filled with despair, and changed herself into a flower, thinking
"Perhaps some one in passing will put his foot upon me and crush
me." But it happened that a shepherd, tending his flock, saw the
flower, and as it was so beautiful, he gathered it, took it home with
igo Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
him, and put it in his chest. From that time everything went wonderfully well in the shepherd's house. When he got up in the morn- ing, all the work was already done; the room was swept, the tables
and benches rubbed, fire kindled on the hearth, and water ready
drawn; and when he came home in the middle of the day, the table
was laid, and a good meal spread upon it. He could not understand
how it was done, for he never saw anybody in his house, and it was
too little for anybody to hide in. The good serving pleased him
well; but in the end he became uneasy, and went to a wise woman
to take counsel of her. The wise woman said, "There is magic in it: get up early some morning, and if you hear something moving in
the room, be it what it may, throw a white cloth over it, and the
charm will be broken."
The shepherd did as she told him, and the next morning at daybreak he saw the chest open, and the flower come out. Then he
jumped up quickly and threw a white cloth over it. So the spell was
broken, and a lovely maiden stood before him; and she told him
that she had been the flower, and had until now cared for his
household matters. She told him all that had happened to her, and
she pleased him so much that he asked her to marry him, but she
answered "No," because she still remained true to her dear Roland, though he had forsaken her; but she promised not to leave the
shepherd, but to go on taking care of his house.
Now the time came when Roland's wedding was to be held; and there was an old custom in that country that all the girls should be
present, and should sing in honor of the bride and bridegroom. The
faithful maiden, when she knew this, was so sorrowful that she felt
as if her heart would break; and she would not go, until the others came and fetched her.
And when her turn came to sing she slipped behind, so that she
stood alone, and so began to sing; and as soon as her song reached
Roland's ear he sprang up and cried, "I know that voice! That is
the right bride, and no other v^dll I have." And everything that he had forgotten, and that had been swept out of his mind, came suddenly home to him in his heart. And the faithful maiden was married to her dear Roland; her sorrow came to an end and her joy
began.
The Devil's Three Gold Hairs
Once there was a very poor woman who was delighted when her
son was bom with a caul enveloping his head. This was supposed
to bring good fortune, and it was predicted that he would marry
the King's daughter when he became nineteen. Soon after, a King came to the village, but no one knew that it was the King. When he
asked for news, they told him that a few days before a child had
been bom in the village, with a caul, and it was prophesied that he
would be very lucky. Indeed, it had been said that in his nineteenth
year he would have the King's daughter for his wife. The King, who had a wicked heart, was very angry when he
heard this; but he went to the parents in a most friendly manner,
and said to them kindly, "Good people, give up your child to me. I
will take the greatest care of him." At first they refused; but when the stranger offered them a large
amount of gold, and then mentioned that if their child was bom to
be lucky everything must turn out for the best with him, they
willingly at last gave him up.
The King placed the child in a box and rode away with it for a
long distance, till he came to deep water, into which he threw the
box containing the child, saying to himself as he rode away, "From
this unwelcome suitor have I saved my daughter." But the box did not sink; it swam Hke a boat on the water, and so
high above it that not a drop got inside. It sailed on to a spot about
two miles from the chief town of the King's dominions, where there were a mill and a weir, which stopped it, and on which it rested.
The miller's man, who happened to be standing near the bank, fortunately noticed it, and thinking it would most likely contain
something valuable, drew it on shore with a hook; but when he
opened it, there lay a beautiful baby, who was quite awake and
lively.
He carried it in to the miller and his wife, and as they had no
children they were quite dehghted, and said Heaven had sent the
little boy as a gift to them. They brought him up carefully, and he
grew to manhood clever and virtuous.
It happened one day that the King was overtaken by a thunderstorm while passing near the mill, and stopped to ask for shelter.
102 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
Noticing the youth, he asked the miller if that tall young man was his son.
"No," he replied; "he is a foundling. Nineteen years ago a box was seen sailing on the mill stream by one of our men, and when it
was caught in the weir he drew it out of the water and found the
child in it." Then the ICing knew that this must be the child of fortune, and therefore the one which he had thrown into the water. He hid his
vexation, however, and presently said kindly, "1 want to send a let- ter to the Queen, my wife; if that young man will take it to her I
will give him two gold-pieces for his trouble."
"We are at the King's service," replied the miller, and called to the young man to prepare for his errand. Then the King wrote a
letter to the Queen, containing these words: "As soon as the boy who brings this letter arrives, let him be killed, and I shall expect to
find him dead and buried when I come back." The youth was soon on his way with this letter. He lost himself,
however, in a large forest. But when darkness came on he saw in
the distance a glimmering Hght, which he walked to, and found a
small house. He entered and saw an old woman sitting by the fire,
quite alone. She appeared frightened when she saw him, and said:
"Where do you come from, and what do you want?"
"I am come from the mill," he replied, "and I am carrying a let- ter to the wife of the King, and, as I have lost my way, I should like
very much to stay here during the night."
"You poor young man," she replied, "you are in a den of robbers,
and when they come home they may kill you."
"They may come when they like," said the youth; "I am not
afraid; but I am so tired that I cannot go a step further." Then he stretched himself on a bench and fell fast asleep.
Soon after the robbers came home, and asked angrily what that
youth was lying there for.
"Ah," said the old woman, "he is an innocent child who has lost himself in the wood, and I took him in out of compassion. He is
carrying a letter to the Queen, which the King has sent." Then the robbers went softly to the sleeping youth, took the letter from his pocket, and read in it that as soon as the bearer arrived
at the palace he was to lose his life. Then pity arose in the hardhearted robbers, and their chief tore up the letter and wrote another, in which it was stated that as soon as the boy arrived he
should be married to the King's daughter. Then they left him to lie and rest on the bench till the next morning, and when he awoke
The Devil's Three Gold Hairs 193
they gave him the letter and showed him the road he was to take.
As soon as he reached the palace and sent in the letter, the
Queen read it, and she acted in exact accordance with what was
written— ordered a grand marriage feast, and had the Princess married at once to the fortunate youth. He was very handsome and
amiable, so that the King's daughter soon learned to love him very much, and was quite happy with him.
Not long after, when the King returned home to his castle, he
found the prophecy respecting the child of fortune fulfilled, and
that he was married to a King's daughter. "How has this happened?" said he. "I have in my letter given very different ordersl"
Then the Queen gave him the letter, and said: "You may see for
yourself what is stated there." The King read the letter and saw very clearly that it was not the
one he had written. He asked the youth what he had done with the
letter he had entrusted to him, and where he had brought the other
from. "I know not," he replied, "unless it was changed during the
night while I slept in the forest."
Full of wrath, the King said, "You shall not get off so easily, for whoever marries my daughter must first bring me three golden
hairs from the head of the demon of the Black Forest. If you bring
them to me before long, then shall you keep my daughter as a wife,
but not otherwise."
Then said the child of fortune, "I will fetch these golden hairs
very quickly; I am not the least afraid of the demon." Thereupon he said farewell, and started on his travels. His way led him to a
large city, and as he stood at the gate and asked admission, a
watchman said to him, "What trade do you follow, and how much
do you know?" "I know everything," he replied.
"Then you can do us a favor," answered the watchman, "if you
can tell why our master's fountain, from which wine used to flow, is
dried up, and never gives us even water now." "I will tell you when
I come back," he said; "only wait till then." He traveled on still further, and came by and by to another town,
where the watchman also asked him what trade he followed, and
what he knew. "I know everything," he answered.
"Then," said the watchman, "you can do us a favor, and tell us why a tree in our town, which once bore golden apples, now only
produces leaves." "Wait till I return," he replied, "and I will tell
you. On he went again, and came to a broad river, over which he
must pass in a ferryboat, and the ferryman asked him the same
194 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
question about his trade and his knowledge. He gave the same
reply, that he knew everything.
"Then," said the man, "you can do me a favor, and tell me how it is that I am obliged to go backward and forward in my ferryboat
every day, without a change of any kind." "Wait till I come back,"
he replied, "then you shall know all about it." As soon as he reached the other side of the water he found the
entrance to the Black Forest, in which was the demon's cove. It was very dark and gloomy, and the demon was not at home; but his old
mother was sitting in a large arm-chair, and she looked up and said,
"What do you want? You don't look wicked enough to be one of
us." "I just want three golden hairs from the demon's head," he replied; "otherwise my wife will be taken away from me."
"That is asking a great deal," she replied; "for if the demon comes home and finds you here, he will have no mercy on you.
However, if you will trust me, I will try to help you."
Then she turned him into an ant, and said: "Creep into the folds
of my gown; there you will be safe."
"Yes," he replied, "that is all very good; but I have three things besides that I want to know. First, why a well, from which formerly
wine used to flow, should be dry now, so that not even water can
be got from it. Secondly, why a tree that once bore golden apples
should now produce nothing but leaves. And, thirdly, why a ferryman is obliged to row forward and back every day, without ever
leaving off."
"These are diflScult questions," said the old woman; "but keep still and quiet, and when the demon comes in, pay great attention
to what he says, while I pull the golden hairs out of his head." Late in the evening the demon came home, and as soon as he entered he declared that the air was not clear. "I smell the flesh of
man," he said, "and I am sure that there is some one here." So he peeped into all the comers, and searched everywhere, but could
find nothing.
Then his old mother scolded him well, and said, "Just as I have been sweeping, and dusting, and putting everything in order, then
you come home and give me all the work to do over again. You
have always the smell of something in yoiu* nose. Do sit down and
eat your supper." The demon did as she told him, and when he had eaten and
drunk enough, he complained of being tired. So his mother made
The DeviVs Three Gold Hairs 195
him lie dovm so that she could place his head in her lap; and he
was soon so comfortable that he fell fast asleep and snored.
Then the old woman lifted up a golden hair, twitched it out, and
laid it by her side. "Oh!" screamed the demon, waking up; "what
was that for?" "I have had a bad dream," answered she, "and it
made me catch hold of your hair."
"What did you dream about?" asked the demon. "Oh, I dreamed of a well in a market-place from which wine once used to flow, but
now it is dried up, and they can't even get water from it. Whose
fault is that?" "Ah, they ought to know that there sits a toad under
a stone in the well, and if he were dead wine would again flow." Then the old woman combed his hair again, till he slept and
snored so loud that the windows rattled, and she pulled out the second hair. "What are you about now?" asked the demon in a rage.
"Oh, don't be angry," said the woman; "I have had another
dream."
"What was this dream about?" he asked. "Why, I dreamed that in a certain country there grows a fruit tree which used to bear
golden apples, but now it produces nothing but leaves. What is the
cause of this?" "Why, don't they know," answered the demon, "that there is a mouse gnawing at the root? Were it dead the tree would
again bear golden apples; and if it gnaws much longer the tree v^dll
wither and dry up. Bother your dreams; if you disturb me again,
just as I am comfortably asleep, you will have a box on the ear." Then the old woman spoke kindly to him, and smoothed and
combed his hair again, till he slept and snored. Then she seized the
third golden hair and pulled it out.
The demon, on this, sprang to his feet, roared out in a greater
rage than ever, and would have done some mischief in the house,
but she managed to appease him this time also, and said: "How
can I help my bad dreams?" "And whatever did you dream?" he
asked, with some curiosity. "Well, I dreamed about a ferryman, who complains that he is obliged to take people across the river,
and is never free." "Oh, the stupid fellowl" replied the wizard, "he can very easily ask any person who wants to be ferried over to take
the oar in his hand, and he will be free at once." Then the demon laid his head down once more; and as the old
mother had pulled out the three golden hairs, and got answers to
all the three questions, she let the old fellow rest and sleep in peace
till the morning dawned.
As soon as he had gone out next day, the old woman took the ant
from the folds of her dress and restored the lucky youth to his for-
196 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
mer shape. "Here are the three golden hairs for which you wished*
said she; "and did you hear all the answers to your three questions?" "Yes," he repHed, "every word, and I will not forget them."
"Well, then, I have helped you out of your difficulties, and now get
home as fast as you can." After thanking the old woman for her kindness, he turned his
steps homeward, full of joy that everything had succeeded so well.
When he arrived at the ferry the man asked for the promised answer. "Ferry me over first," he repHed, "and then I will tell you." So when they reached the opposite shore he gave the ferryman
the demon's advice, that the next person who came and wished to be ferried over should have the oar placed in his hand, and from
that moment he would have to take the ferryman's place. Then the youth journeyed on till he came to the town where the
unfruitful tree grew, and where the watchman was waiting for his
answer. To him the young man repeated what he had heard, and
said, "Kill the mouse that is gnawing at the root; then will your
tree again bear golden apples." The watchman thanked him, and gave him in return for his information two asses laden with gold, which were led after him. He
very soon arrived at the city which contained the dried-up foun- tain. The sentinel came forward to receive his answer. Said the
youth, "Under a stone in the fountain sits a toad; it must be
searched for and killed; then will wine again flow from it." To show how thankful he was for this advice, the sentinel also ordered two
asses laden with gold to be sent after him.
At length the child of fortune reached home with his riches, and
his wife was overjoyed at seeing him again, and hearing how well
he had succeeded in his undertaking. He placed before the King
the three golden hairs he had brought from the head of the black
demon; and when the King saw these and the four asses laden with
gold he was quite satisfied, and said, "Now that you have per- formed all the required conditions, I am quite ready to sanction
your marriage with my daughter; but, my dear son-in-law, tell me
how you obtained all this gold. It is indeed a very valuable treasure; where did you find it?" "I crossed the river in a ferryboat, and
on the opposite shore I found the gold lying in the sand."
"Can I find some if I go?" asked the King eagerly. "Yes, as much
as you please," replied he. "There is a ferryman there who wiU row
you over, and you can fill a sack in no time." The greedy old King set out on his journey in aU haste, and when
The Griffin 197
he came near the river he beckoned to the ferryman to row him
over the ferry.
The man told him to step in, and just as they reached the opposite shore he placed the rudder-oar in the King's hand, and sprang out of the boat; and so the King became a ferryman as a punish- ment for his sins.
I wonder if he still goes on ferrying people over the river! It is
very likely, for no one has ever been persuaded to touch the oar since he took it.
The Griffin
There was once upon a time a King, but where he reigned and
what he was called, I do not know. He had no son, but an only
daughter who had always been ill, and no doctor had been able to
cure her. Then it was foretold to the King that his daughter should
eat herself well with an apple. So he ordered it to be proclaimed
throughout the whole of his kingdom, that whosoever brought his
daughter an apple with which she could eat herself well, should
have her to wife, and be King. This became known to a peasant
who had three sons, and he said to the eldest, "Go out into the gar- den and take a basketful of those beautiful apples with the red
cheeks and carry them to the court; perhaps the King's daughter will be able to eat herself well with them, and then thou wilt marry
her and be King." The lad did so, and set out. When he had gone a short way he met a little iron man who
asked him what he had there in the basket, to which replied Uele,
for so was he named, "Frogs' legs." On this the little man said,
"Well, so shall it be, and remain," and went away. At length Uele arrived at the palace, and made it known that he had brought
apples which would cure the King's daughter if she ate them. This delighted the King hugely, and he caused Uele to be brought be- fore him; but, alas I when he opened the basket, instead of having
apples in it he had frogs' legs which were still kicking about. On this the King grew angry, and had him driven out of the house.
When he got home he told his father how it had fared with him.
Then the father sent the next son, who was called Seame, but all
went with him just as it had gone with Uele. He also met the little
igS Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
iron man, who asked what he had there in the basket. Seame said,
"Hogs' bristles," and the iron man said, 'Well, so shall it be, and
remain."
When Seame got to the King's palace and said he brought apples
with which the King's daughter might eat herself well, they did not want to let him go in, and said that one fellow had already been
there, and had treated them as if they were fools. Seame, however,
maintained that he certainly had the apples, and that they ought to
let him go in. At length they believed him, and led him to the King.
But when he uncovered the basket, he had but hogs' bristles. This enraged the King terribly, so he caused Seame to be whipped out
of the house. When he got home he related all that had befallen him.
Then the youngest boy, whose name was Hans, but who was always called Stupid Hans, came and asked his father if he might go
with some apples. "Oh!" said the father, "you would be just the
right fellow for such a thing! If the clever ones can't manage it,
what can you do?" The boy, however, did not believe him, and
said, "Indeed, father, I wish to go." "Just get away, you stupid
fellow, you must wait tiU you are wiser," said the father to that, and turned his back. Hans, however, pulled at the back of his smockfrock and said, 'Indeed, father, I wish to go." "Well, then, so far as
I am concerned you may go, but you will soon come home again!" replied the old man in a spiteful voice. The boy, however, was tremendously delighted and jumped for joy. "Well, act like a fool! you
grow more stupid every day!" said the father again. Hans, however, did not care about that, and did not let it spoil his pleasure, but as
it was then night, he thought he might as well wait until the morrow, for he could not get to court that day.
All night long he could not sleep in his bed, and if he did doze
for a moment, he dreamt of beautiful maidens, of palaces, of gold,
and of silver, and all lands of things of that sort. Early in the morning, he went forth on his way, and directly afterwards the little
shabby-looking man in his iron clothes, came to him and asked
what he was carrying in the basket. Hans gave him the answer that
he was carrying apples with which the King's daughter was to eat
herself well. "Then," said the little man, "so shall they be, and
remain." But at the court they would none of them let Hans go in, for they said two had already been there who had told them that
they were bringing apples, and one of them had frogs' legs, and the
other hogs' bristles. Hans, however, resolutely maintained that he
most certainly had no frogs' legs, but some of the most beautiful
The Griffin 199
apples in the whole Icingdom. As he spoke so pleasantly, the doorkeeper thought he could not be telling a He, and asked him to go in,
and he was right, for when Hans uncovered his basket in the King's presence, golden-yellow apples came tumbling out. The King was delighted, and caused some of them to be taken to his daughter,
and then waited in anxious expectation until news should be
brought to him of the effect they had. But before much time had
passed by, news was brought to him: but who do you think it was
who came? it was his daughter herself 1 As soon as she had eaten of
those apples, she was cured, and sprang out of her bed.
The joy the King felt cannot be described! But now he did not
want to give his daughter in marriage to Hans, and said he must
first make him a boat which would go quicker on dry land than on
water, Hans agreed to the conditions, and went home, and related how it had fared with him.
Then the father sent Uele into the forest to make a boat of that
Idnd. He worked diligently, and whistled all the time. At mid-day, when the sun was at the highest, came the little iron man and asked
what he was making. Uele gave him for answer, "Wooden bowls
for the kitchen." The iron man said, "So it shall be, and remain." By evening Uele thought he had now made the boat, but when he
wanted to get into it, he had nothing but wooden bowls. The next
day Seame went into the forest, but everything went with him just
as it had done with Uele. On the third day Stupid Hans went. He
worked away most industriously, so that the whole forest resounded
with the heavy strokes, and all the while he sang and whistled right
merrily. At mid-day, when it was the hottest, the little man came
again, and asked what he was making. "A boat which will go
quicker on dry land than on the water," replied Hans, "and when I
have finished it, I am to have the King's daughter for my wife."
"Well," said the little man, "such shall it be, and remain." In the evening, when the sun had turned into gold, Hans finished his boat,
and aU that was wanted for it. He got into it and rowed to the pal- ace. The boat went as swiftly as the wind.
The King saw it from afar, but would not give his daughter to
Hans yet, and said he must first take a hundred hares out to pasture
from early morning until late evening, and if one of them got away,
he should not have his daughter. Hans was contented with this, and
the next day went with his flock to the pasture, and took great care
that none of them ran away.
Before many hours had passed came a servant from the palace,
and told Hans that he must give her a hare iastantly, for some visi-
200 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
tors had come unexpectedly. Hans, however, was very well aware
what that meant, and said he would not give her one; the King
might set some hare soup before his guests next day. The maid,
however, would not believe in his refusal, and at last she began to
get angry with him. Then Hans said that if the King's daughter came herself, he would give her a hare. The maid told this in the
palace, and the daughter did go herself.
In the meantime, however, the little man came again to Hans,
and asked him what he was doing there. He said he had to watch
over a hundred hares and see that none of them ran away, and then
he might marry the King's daughter and be King. "Good," said the
little man, "there is a whistle for you, and if one of them runs
away, just whistle with it, and then it wiU come back again." When
the King's daughter came, Hans gave her a hare into her apron; but when she had gone about a hundred steps with it, he whistled, and
the hare jmnped out of the apron, and before she could turn round
was back to the flock again. When the evening came the hare-herd whistled once more, and looked to see if all were there, and then
drove them to the palace. The King wondered how Hans had been
able to take a hundred hares to graze without losing any of them;
he would, however, not give him his daughter yet, and said he must
now bring him a feather from the GriflBn's tail. Hans set out at once, and walked straight forwards. In the evening he came to a castle, and there he asked for a night's lodging, for at that time there were no inns. The lord of the castle promised
him that with much pleasure, and asked where he was going. Hans
answered, "To the GriflBn." "Oh! to the Griffin! They tell me he knows everything, and I have lost the key of an iron money-chest;
so you might be so good as to ask him where it is." "Yes, indeed,"
said Hans, "I wiU soon do that." Early the next morning he went onwards, and on his way arrived at another castle in which he
again stayed the night. When the people who Hved there learnt
that he was going to the Griffin, they said they had in the house a
daughter who was ill, and that they had aheady tried every means
to cure her, but none of them had done her any good, and he might
be so kind as to ask the Griffin what would make their daughter
healthy again. Hans said he would willingly do that, and went on- wards. Then he came to a lake, and instead of a ferryboat, a tall,
tall man was there who had to carry everybody across. The man
asked Hans whither he was joimieying. "To the Griffin," said Hans.
"Then when you get to him," said the man, "just ask him why I am
forced to carry everybody over the lake?" "Yes, indeed, most cer-
The Griffin 201
tainly I'll do that," said Hans. Then the man took him up on his shoulders, and carried him across.
At length Hans arrived at the GriflBn's house, but the wife only was at home, and not the GriflBn himself. Then the woman asked
him what he wanted. Thereupon he told her everything: that he
had to get a feather out of the Griffin's tail; and that there was a castle where they had lost the key of their money-chest, and he was to ask the Griffin where it was; that in another castle the daughter
was iU, and he was to learn what would cure her; and then not far
from thence there was a lake and a man beside it, who was forced
to carry people across it, and he was very anxious to leam why the
man was obliged to do it.
Then said the woman, "But look here, my good friend, no Chris- tian can speak to the Griffin. He devours them all. But if you like,
you can lie down under his bed, and in the night, when he is quite
fast asleep, you can reach out and pull a feather out of his tail; and
as for those things which you are to leam, I will ask about them
myself." Hans was quite satisfied with this, and got under the bed. In the evening, the Griffin came home, and as soon as he entered
the room, said, "Wife, I smell a Christian.'' "Yes," said the woman,
"one was here today, but he went away again." Then the Griffin said no more.
In the middle of the night when the Griffin was snoring loudly,
Hans reached out and plucked a feather from his tail. The Griffin
woke up instantly, and said, "Wife, I smell a Christian, and it
seems to me that somebody was pulling at my tail." His wife said,
"You have certainly been dreaming, and I told you before that a Christian was here today, but that he went away again. He told me
all kinds of things— that in one castle they had lost the key of their
money-chest, and could find it nowhere." "Oh! the fools!" said the
Griffin; "the key lies in the wood-house under a log of wood behind
the door." "And then he said that in another castle the daughter
was ill, and they knew no remedy that would ciure her." "Oh! the
fools!" said the Griffin; "under the cellar-steps a toad has made its
nest of her hair, and if she got her hair back she would be well."
"And then he also said that there was a place where there was a lake and a man beside it who was forced to carry everybody
across." "Oh, the fool!" said the Griffin; "if he only put one man
down in the middle, he would never have to carry another across." Early the next morning the Griffin got up and went out. Then
Hans came forth from under the bed, and he had a beautiful
feather, and had heard what the Griffin had said about the key, and
202 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
the daughter, and the ferry-man. The Griffin's wife repeated it all once more to him that he might not forget it, and then he went
home again.
First he came to the man by the lake, who asked him what the
Griffin had said, but Hans replied that he must first carry him
across, and then he would tell him. So the man carried him across,
and when he was over Hans told him that all he had to do was to
set one person down in the middle of the lake, and then he would
never have to carry over any more. The man was hugely delisted,
and told Hans that out of gratitude he would take him once more
across, and back again. But Hans said no, he would save him the
trouble, he was quite satisfied already, and pursued his way. Then
he came to the castle where the daughter was ill; he took her on his
shoulders, for she could not walk, and carried her down the cellarsteps and puUed out the toad's nest from beneath the lowest step and gave it into her hand, and she sprang off his shoulder and up
the steps before him, and was quite ciued. Then were the father
and mother beyond measure rejoiced, and they gave Hans gifts of
gold and of silver, and whatsoever else he wished for, that they
gave him. And when he got to the other castle he went at once into
the wood-house, and found the key under the log of wood behind
the door, and took it to the lord of the castle. He also was not a little pleased, and gave Hans as a reward much of the gold that was
in the chest, and all Idnds of things besides, such as cows, and
sheep, and goats.
When Hans arrived before the King, with all these things— with
the money, and the gold, and the silver and the cows, sheep and
goats, the King asked him how he had come by them. Then Hans
told him that the Griffin gave every one whatsoever he wanted. So
the King thought he himself could make such things useful, and set
out on his way to the Griffin; but when he got to the lake, it happened that he was the very first who arrived there after Hans, and
the man put him down in the middle of it and went away, and the
King was drowned. Hans, however, married the daughter, and be- came King.
The Sea-Hare
There was once upon a time a Princess, who, high under the battlements in her castle, had an apartment with twelve windows, which
looked out in every possible direction, and when she climbed up to
it and looked around her, she could inspect her whole kingdom.
When she looked out of the first, her sight was more keen than that
of any other human being; from the second she could see still bet- ter, from the third more distinctly still, and so it went on, until the
twelfth, from which she saw everything above the earth and xmder
the earth, and nothing at all could be kept secret from her. More- over, as she was haughty, and would be subject to no one, but
wished to keep the dominion for herself alone, she caused it to be
proclaimed that no one should ever be her husband who could not
conceal himself from her so effectually, that it should be quite impossible for her to find him. He who tried this, however, and was
discovered by her, was to have his head struck off, and stuck on a
post. Ninety-seven posts with the heads of dead men were aheady
standing before the castle, and no one had come forward for a long
time. The Princess was delighted, and thought to herself, "Now I
shall be free as long as I live." Then three brothers appeared before her, and announced to her
that they were desirous of trying their luck. The eldest beheved he
would be quite safe if he crept into a limepit, but she saw him from
the first window, made him come out, and had his head cut off. The
second crept into the cellar of the palace, but she perceived him
also from the first window, and his fate was sealed. His head was
placed on the nine and ninetieth post. Then the youngest came to
her and entreated her to give him a day for consideration, and also
to be so gracious as to overlook it if she should happen to discover
him twice, but if he failed the third time, he would look on his life
as over. As he was so handsome, and begged so earnestly, she said,
"Yes, I will grant thee that, but thou wilt not succeed." Next day he meditated for a long time how he should hide him- self, but all in vain. Then he seized his gun and went out hunting.
He saw a raven, took a good aim at him, and was just going to fire,
when the bird cried, "Don't shoot; I will make it worth thy while
not to kill me." He put his gun down, went on, and came to a lake
204 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
where he surprised a large fish which had come up from the depths
below to the siuf ace of the water. When he had aimed at it, the fish
cried, "Don't shoot, and I will make it worth thy while." He al- lowed it to dive down again, went onwards, and met a fox which
was lame. He fired and missed it, and the fox cried, "You had much
better come here and draw the thorn out of my foot for me." He did this; but then he wanted to kill the fox and sldn it. The fox said,
"Stop, and I will make it worth thy while." The youth let him go, and then as it was evening, returned home.
Next day he was to hide himself; but howsoever much he puz- zled his brains over it, he did not know where. He went into the
forest to the raven and said, "I let thee live on, so now teU me
where I am to hide myself, so that the King's daughter shall not see
me." The raven hung his head and thought it over for a long time.
At length he croaked, *T have it." He fetched an egg out of his nest, cut it into two parts, and shut the youth inside it; then made it
whole again, and seated himself on it. When the King's daughter went to the first window she could not discover him, nor could she
from the others, and she begain to be uneasy, but from the eleventh
she saw him. She ordered the raven to be shot, and the egg to be
brought and broken, and the youth was forced to come out. She
said, "For once thou art excused, but if thou dost not do better
than this, thou art lost!"
Next day he went to the lake, called the fish to him and said, "I suffered thee to live, now tell me where to hide myself so that the
King's daughter may not see me." The fish thought for a while, and
at last cried, "I have it! I will shut thee up in my stomach." He swallowed him, and went down to the bottom of the lake. The
King's daughter looked through her windows, and even from the eleventh did not see him, and was alarmed; but at length from the
twelfth she saw him. She ordered the fish to be caught and killed,
and then the youth appeared. Every one can imagine what a state
of mind he was in. She said, "Twice thou art forgiven, but be sure
that thy head will be set on the hundredth post." On the last day, he went with a heavy heart into the country, and
met the fox. "Thou knowest how to find all kinds of hiding-places,"
said he; '1 let thee live, now advise me where I shall hide myself so
that the King's daughter shall not discover me." "That's a hard
task," answered the fox, looking very thoughtful. At length he cried,
"1 have it!" and went with him to a spring, dipped himself in it, and came out as a stall-keeper in the market, and dealer in animals.
The youth had to dip himself in the water also, and was changed
The Maiden Without Hands 205
into a small sea-hare. The merchant went into the town, and
showed the pretty little animal, and many persons gathered together to see it.
At length the King's daughter came hkewise, and as she Uked it very much, she bought it, and gave the merchant a good deal of
money for it. Before he gave it over to her, he said to it, "When the
King's daughter goes to the window, creep quickly under the braids of her hair." And now the time arrived when she was to search for him. She
went to one window after another in turn, from the first to the eleventh, and did not see him. When she did not see him from the
twelfth either, she was full of anxiety and anger, and shut it down
with such violence that the glass in every window shivered into a
thousand pieces, and the whole castle shook.
She went back and felt the sea-hare beneath the braids of her
hair. Then she seized it, and threw it on the grormd exclaiming,
"Away with thee, get out of my sight!" It ran to the merchant, and both of them hmried to the spring, wherein they plunged, and re- ceived back their true forms. The youth thanked the fox, and said,
"The raven and the fish are idiots compared with thee; thou knowest
the right tune to play, there is no denying thatl" The youth went straight to the palace. The Princess was already
expecting him, and accomanodated herself to her destiny. The wed- ding was solemnized, and now he was King, and lord of all the
kingdom. He never told her where he had concealed himself for the
third time, and who had helped him, so she believed that he had
done everything by his own skill, and she had a great respect for
him, for she thought to herself, "He is able to do more than I."
The Maiden Without Hands
A MILLER, who had gradually become very poor, had nothing left
but his mill and a large apple tree behind it. One day when he
went into the forest to gather wood, an old man, whom he had
never seen before, came toward him, and said, "Why do you take the trouble to cut down wood? I will give you great riches if you
will promise to let me have what stands behind your mill."
"That can be no other than my apple tree," thought the miller. "I
2o6 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
possess nothing else." So he said to the old man, "Yes, I will let you
have it."
Then the stranger smiled maliciously, and said, "In three years I
will come again to claim what belongs to me," and after saying this he departed.
As soon as the miller returned home, his wife came toward him
and said: "Miller, from whence have all these riches come so sud- denly to our house? All at once every drawer and chest has become
full of gold. No one brought it here, and I know not where it came
from." "Oh," replied her husband, *1 know all about it. A strange man whom I met in the wood promised me great treasures if I would
make over to him what stood behind the mill. I knew I had nothing
there but the large apple tree, so I gave him my promise."
"Oh, husband!" said the wife in alarm, "that must have been the wizard. He did not mean the apple tree, but our daughter, who was
behind the mill sweeping out the court."
The miller's daughter was a modest and beautiful maiden, and Hved in innocence and obedience to her parents for three years,
until the day came on which the v^dcked wizard was to claim her.
She knew he was coming, and after washing till she was pm"e and clean as snow, she drew a circle of white chalk and stood within it.
The v^dzard made his appearance very early, but he did not dare
to venture over the white circle, therefore he could not get near
her. In great anger he said to the miller, "Take away every drop of water, that she may not wash, otherwise I shall have no power over
her!" The frightened miller did as he desired, but on the next morning,
when the wizard came again, her hands were as pure and clean as
ever, for she had wept over them. On this account the wdzard was
still unable to approach her; so he flew into a rage, and said, "Chop
her hands off, otherwise I cannot touch her."
Then the miller was terrified, and exclaimed, "How can I cut off
the hands of my own child?"
Then the wicked wizard threatened him, and said, "If you will not do as I desire you, then I can claim you instead of your daughter, and carry you off." The father listened in agony, and in his fright promised to obey.
He went to his daughter, and said to her, "Oh, my child, unless I cut off your two hands the wizard will take me away vvdth him, and
in mv anguish I have promised. Help me in my trouble, and forgive
The Maiden Without Hands 207
me for the wicked deed I have promised to do." "Dear father," she
replied, "do with me what you will: I am your child." Thereupon she placed her two hands on the table before him,
and he cut them oflF. The wizard came next day for the third time,
but the poor girl had wept so bitterly over the stumps of her arms
that they were as clean and white as ever. Then he was obhged to
give way, for he had lost all right to the maiden.
As soon as the wizard had departed the miller said, "My child, I have obtained so much good through your conduct that for your
whole lifetime I shall hold you most precious and dear." "But I
cannot stay here, father," she replied; "I am not safe; let me go
away with people who will give me the sympathy I need so much."
"I fear such people are very seldom to be found in the world," said her father. However, he let her go. So she tied up her maimed arms
and went forth on her way at sunrise.
For a whole day she traveled without food, and as night came on
found herself near one of the royal gardens. By the Hght of the
moon she could see many trees laden with beautiful fruit, but she
could not reach them, because the place was surrotmded by a moat
full of water. She had been without a morsel to eat the whole day,
and her hunger was so great that she could not help crying out,
"Oh, if I were only able to get some of that delicious fruitl I shall
die unless I can obtain something to eat very soon." Then she knelt down and prayed for help, and while she prayed
a guardian fairy appeared and made a channel in the water so that
she was able to pass through on dry ground.
When she entered the garden the fairy was with her, although
she did not know it, so she walked to a tree full of beautiful pears,
not knowing that they had been coimted.
Being unable to pluck any without hands, she went quite close to
the tree and ate one with her mouth as it himg. One, and no more,
just to stay her himger. The gardener, who saw her with the^aity
standing near her, thought it was a spirit, and was too frightened to
move or speak.
After having satisfied her hunger the maiden went and laid herself down among the shrubs and slept in peace. On the following
morning the King, to whom the garden belonged, came out to look
at his fruit trees, and when he reached the pear tree and counted
the pears, he foimd one missing. At first he thought it had fallen,
but it was not under the tree, so he went to the gardener and asked
what had become of it.
Then said the gardener, "There was a ghost in the garden last
2o8 GrimrrCs Complete Fairy Tales
night who had no hands, and ate a pear oflE the tree with its
mouth." "How could the ghost get across the water?" asked the
King; "and what became of it after eating the pear?"
To this the gardener replied, "Some one came first in snow-white robes from heaven, who made a channel and stopped the flow of
the water so that the ghost walked through on dry ground. It must
have been an angel," continued the gardener; "and therefore I was afraid to ask questions or to call out. As soon as the specter had
eaten one pear it went away."
Then said the King, "Conceal from every one what you have told
me, and I will watch myself tonight." As soon as it was dark the King came into the garden and
brought a priest with him to address the ghost, and they both
seated themselves vmder a tree, with the gardener standing near
them, and waited in silence. About midnight the maiden crept out
from the bushes and went to the pear tree, and the three watchers
saw her eat a pear from the tree without picking it, while an angel
stood near in white garments.
Then the priest went toward her, and said, "Art thou come from
Heaven or earth? Art thou a spirit or a human being?"
Then the maiden answered, "Ah, me! I am no ghost, only a poor
creatiure forsaken by every one but God."
Then said the King, "You may be forsaken by all the world, but
if you will let me be yoin: friend, I will never forsake you."
So the maiden was taken to the King's castle, and she was so beautiful and modest that the King learned to love her with all his
heart. He had silver hands made for her, and very soon after they
were married with great pomp.
About a year after, the King had to go to battle, and he placed
his young wife under the care of his mother, who promised to be
very kind to her, and to write to him.
Not long after this the Queen had a little son bom, and the
King's mother wrote a letter to him immediately, so that he might have the earliest intelligence, and sent it by a messenger.
The messenger, however, after traveling a long way, became
tired and sat down to rest by a brook, where he soon fell fast
asleep. Then came the wizard, who was always trying to injure the
good Queen, took away the letter from the sleeping messenger, and
replaced it by another, in which it was stated that the little child
was a changeling.
Knowing nothing of the change, the messenger carried this letter
to the King, who, when he read it, was terribly distressed and trou-
The Maiden Without Hands 209
bled. However, he wrote in reply to say that the Queen was to have
every attention and care till his return.
The wicked wizard again watched for the messenger, and while
he slept exchanged the King's kind letter for another, in which was
written to the King's mother an order to kill both the Queen and her child.
The old mother was quite terrified when she read this letter, for
she could not believe the King meant her to do anything so dreadful. She wrote again to the King, but there was no answer, for the
wicked wizard always interrupted the messengers, and sent false
letters. The last was worse than all, for it stated that instead of
killing the mother and her child, they were to cut out the tongue of
the changeUng and put out the mother's eyes.
But the King's mother was too good to attend to these dreadful orders, so she said to the Queen, while her eyes streamed with
tears, "I cannot Idll you both, as the King desires me to do; but I must not let you remain here any longer. Go, now, out into the
world with your child, and do not come here again." Then she
bound the boy on his mother's back, and the poor woman departed, weeping as she went.
After walking some time she reached a dense forest, and knew
not which road to take. So she knelt down and prayed for help. As
she rose from her knees she saw a light shining from the window of
a little cottage, on which was hung a small sign-board, with these
words: "Every one who dwells here is safe." Out of the cottage
stepped a maiden dressed in snowy garments, and said, "Welcome,
Queen wife," and led her in. Then she unfastened the baby from
his mother's back, and hushed him in her arms till he slept so peacefully that she laid him on a bed in another room, and came back to his mother.
The poor woman looked at her earnestly, and said, "How did
you know I was a Queen?" The white maiden replied: "I am a
good fairy sent to take care of you and your child." So she remained in that cottage many years, and was very happy,
and so pious and good that her hands, which had been cut off, were
allowed to grow again, and the little boy became her great comfort.
Not long after she had been sent away from the castle the King
returned, and immediately asked to see his wife and child.
Then his old mother began to weep, and said, "You wicked man, how can you ask me for your wife and child when you wrote me
such dreadful letters, and told me to kill two such innocent
beings?"
210 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
The King, in distress, asked her what she meant; and she showed
him the letters she had received, which were changed by the
dreadful wizard. Then the King began to weep so bitterly for his
wife and child that the old woman pitied him, and said, "Do not be so unhappy; they still hve; I could not Idll them. But your wife and
child are gone into the wide world, never to come back for fear of
your anger." Then said the King, "I will go to the ends of the earth to find them, and I wiU neither eat nor drink till I find my dear wife, even
if I should die of hunger." Thereupon the King started on his expedition, traveling over
rocks and vaUeys, over mountains and highways, for seven long
years. But he found her not, and he thought she was starved to
death, and that he should never see her again.
He neither ate nor drank during the whole time of earthly food,
but Heaven sent him help. At last he arrived at a large forest and
found the little cottage with the sign-board, and the words upon it:
"Every one who dwells here is safe." While he stood reading the words the maiden in white raiment
came out, took him by the hand, and led him into the cottage, saying, "My lord the King is welcome; but why is he here?" Then he
replied, "I have been for seven years traveHng about the world hoping to find my wife and child, but I have not yet succeeded.
Can you help me?" "Sit down," said the angel, "and take something to eat and drink first." The King was so tired that he gladly obeyed, for he really
wanted rest. Then he laid himself down and slept, and the maiden in the white raiment covered his face.
Then she went into an inner chamber where the Queen sat with
her little son, whom she had named "Pain-bringer," and said to her,
"Go out together into the other chamber; your husband is come." The poor Queen went out, but still sorrowfully, for she remem- bered the cruel letters his mother had received, and knew not that
he still loved her. Just as she entered the room the covering fell oflF
his face, and she told her Uttle son to replace it.
The boy went forward and laid the cloth gently over the face of
the strange man. But the King heard the voice in his slumber, and
moved his head so that the covering again fell oflF.
"My child," said the Queen, "cover the face of thy father."
He looked at her in surprise, and said, "How can I cover my fa- ther s face, dear mother? I have no father in this world. You have
taught me to pray to 'Ovoc Father, which art in heaven,' and I
The Pink 211
thought my father was God. This strange man is not my father; I
don't know him." When the King heard this he started up and asked who they
were. Then said the Queen, "I am your wife, and this is your son."
The King looked at her with surprise. "Your face and your voice
are the same," he said; "but my wife had silver hands, and yoiurs
are natural." "My hands have mercifully been allowed to grow
again," she replied; and, as he still doubted, the maiden in white entered the room, carrying the silver hands, which she showed to
the King. Then he saw at once that this was indeed his dear lost wife and
his own little son; and he embraced them, full of joy, exclaiming,
"Now has a heavy stone fallen from my heartl" The maiden prepared a dinner for them, of which they all partook together; and, after a kind farewell, the King started with his
wife and child to return home to the castle, where his mother and
all the household received them with great joy.
A second marriage-feast was prepared, and the happiness of their
latter days made amends for all they had sufEered through the
wicked demon who had caused them so much pain and trouble.
The Pink
There was once a Queen, who had not been blessed with children.
As she walked in her garden, she prayed every morning that a son
or a daughter might be given to her. One day an Angel came and
said to her, "Be content; you shall have a son, and he shall be en- dowed with the power of wishing, so that whatsoever he wishes for
shall be granted to him." She hurried to the King, and told him the joyful news; and when the time came a son was bom to them, and
they were filled with delight.
Every morning the Queen used to take her Httle son into the gar- dens, where the wild animals were kept, to wash him in a clear,
sparkling fountain. It happened one day, when the child was a little
older, that as she sat with him on her lap she fell asleep.
The old cook, who knew that the child had the power of wishing,
came by and stole the infant. He also killed a chicken and dropped
some of its blood on the Queen's garments. He took the child away
212 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
to a secret place, where he placed it out to be nursed. Then he ran
back to the King, and accused the Queen of having allowed her
child to be carried o£F by a wild animal.
When the King saw the blood on the Queen's garments he believed the story, and was overwhelmed v^dth anger. He caused a
high tower to be built, into which neither the sun nor the moon
could penetrate. Then he ordered his wife to be shut up in it, and
the door walled up. She was to stay there for seven years, without
eating or drinking, so as gradually to pine away. But two Angels
from heaven, in the shape of white doves, came to her, bringing
food twice a day till the seven years were ended.
But the cook thought, "If the child really has the power of wishing, and I stay here, I might easily fall into disgrace." So he left the palace, and went to the boy, who was old enough to talk now, and
said to him, "Wish for a beautiful castle, with a garden, and everything belonging to it." Hardly had the words passed the boy's lips than all that he had asked for was there. After a time the cook said,
"It is not good for you to be so much alone; wish for a beautiful
maiden to be your companion." The Prince uttered the wish, and immediately a maiden stood before them, more beautiful than any painter could paint. So they
grew very fond of each other, and played together, while the cook
went out hunting like any grand gentleman. But the idea came to
him one day that the Prince might wish to go to his father some
time, and he would thereby be placed in a very awkward position.
So he took the maiden aside, and said to her, "Tonight, when the boy is asleep, go and drive this knife into his heart. Then bring me
his heart and his tongue. If you fail to do it, you will lose your own
life." Then he went away; but when the next day came, the maiden
had not yet obeyed his command, and she said, "Why should I shed his innocent blood, when he has never done any harm to a
creature in his life?"
The cook again said, 'If you do not obey me, you will lose your
own Hfe." When he had gone away, she ordered a young hind to be brought
and killed; then she cut out its heart and its tongue, and put them on
a dish. When she saw the old man coming she said to the boy, "Get
into bed, and cover yourself right over."
The old scoundrel came in and said, "Where are the tongue and
the heart of the boy?" The maiden gave him the dish; but the Prince threw ofiE the cov-
The Pink 213
erings, and said, "You old sinner, why did you want to Idll me?
Now bear your sentence. You shall be tiu-ned into a black poodle, with a gold chain round your neck, and you shall be made to eat
live coals, so that flames of fire may come out of your mouth." As he said the words, the old man was changed into a black poodle, with a gold chain round his neck; and the scullions brought out
live coals, which he had to eat till the flames poured out of his
mouth.
The Prince stayed on at the castle for a time, thinking of his
mother, and wondering if she was still alive. At last he said to the
maiden, "I am going into my own country. If you like you can go
with me; I will take you."
She answered, "Alasl it is so far off, and what should I do in a
strange coimtry where I know no one?" As she did not wish to go, and yet they could not bear to be
parted, he changed her into a beautiful pink, which he took with him.
Then he set out on his journey, and the poodle was made to run
alongside till the Prince reached his own country.
Arrived there, he went straight to the tower where his mother
was imprisoned, and as the tower was so high he wished for a
ladder to reach the top. Then he climbed up, looked in, and cried,
"Dearest mother, lady Queen, are you still alive?" She, thinking it was the Angels who brought her food come back,
said, "I have just eaten; I do not want anything more."
Then he said, "I am your own dear son whom the wild animals were supposed to have devoured; but I am still ahve, and I shall
soon come and rescue you." Then he got down and went to his father. He had himself announced as a strange huntsman, anxious to take service with the
King, who said, "Yes; if you are skilled in game preserving, and can procure plenty of venison, I will engage you. But there has never
before been any game in the whole district." The huntsman promised to procure as much game as the King
could possibly require for the royal table.
Then he called the whole hunt together, and ordered them all
into the forest with him. He caused a great circle to be enclosed,
with only one outlet; then he took his place in the middle, and
began to wish as hard as he could. Immediately over two hundred
head of game came running into the enclosure. These the huntsmen had to shoot, and then they were piled on to sixty country
214 Grimms Complete Fairy Tales
wagons, and driven home to the King. So for once he was able to
load his board with game, after having had none for many years.
The King was much pleased, and commanded his whole court to
a banquet on the following day. When they were all assembled, he
said to the huntsman, Tou shall sit by me as you are so clever."
He answered, "My Lord and King, may it please your Majesty, I
am only a poor huntsmani"
The King, however, insisted, and said, "1 command you to sit by
me." As he sat there, his thoughts wandered to his dear mother, and
he wished one of the courtiers would speak of her. Hardly had he
wished it than the Lord High Marshal said, "Your Majesty, we are all rejoicing here, how fares it with Her Majesty the Queen? Is she
still alive in the tower, or has she perished?"
But the King answered, "She allowed my beloved son to be devoured by wild animals, and I do not wish to hear anything
about her."
Then the huntsman stood up and said, "Gracious father, she is stiU alive, and I am her son. He was not devoured by wild animals;
he was taken away by the scoundrel of a cook. He stole me while
my mother was asleep, and sprinkled her garments with the blood
of a chicken." Then he brought up the black poodle with the
golden chain, and said, "This is the villain." He ordered some live coals to be brought, which he made the
dog eat in the sight of all the people till the flames poured out of
his mouth. Then he asked the King if he would like to see the cook
in his true shape, and wished him back, and there he stood in his
white apron, with his knife at his side. The King was furious when
he saw him, and ordered him to be thrown into the deepest dungeon.
Then the himtsman said further, "My father, would you like to see the maiden who so tenderly saved my life when she was ordered to kill me, although by so doing she might have lost her own
Hfe?" The King answered, "Yes, I will gladly see her."
Then his son said, "Gracious father, I will show her to you first in
the guise of a beautiful flower." He put his hand into his pocket, and brought out the pink. It was
a finer one than the King had ever seen before. Then his son said,
"Now, I will show her to you in her true form." In a moment after his wish was uttered, she stood before them in
all her beauty, which was greater than any artist could paint.
Mother Hulda 215
The King sent ladies and gentlemen-in-waiting to the tower to
bring the Queen back to his royal table. But when they reached the
tower they found that she would no longer eat or drink, and she
said, "The merciful God, who has preserved my life so long, will soon release me now." Three days after she died. At her burial the two white doves
which had brought her food during her captivity, followed and
hovered over her grave.
The old King caused the wicked cook to be torn into four quarters; but his own heart was filled with grief and remorse, and he died soon after.
His son married the beautiful maiden he had brought home with
him as a flower, and, for all I know, they may be living still.
Mother Hulda
A WIDOW had two daughters; one was pretty and industrious, the
other was ugly and la2y. And as the ugly one was her own daugh- ter, she loved her much the best, and the pretty one was made to
do all the work, and be the drudge of the house. Every day the
poor girl had to sit by a well on the high road and spin until her
fingers bled. Now it happened once that as the spindle was bloody,
she dipped it into the well to wash it; but it sHpped out of her hand
and fell in. Then she began to cry, and ran to her step-mother, and
told her of her misfortune; and her step-mother scolded her without
mercy, and said in her rage, "As you have let the spindle fall in,
you must go and fetch it out again!" Then the girl went back again to the well, not knowing what to
do, and in the despair of her heart she jumped down into the well
the same way the spindle had gone. After that she knew nothing;
and when she came to herself she was in a beautifuJ meadow, and
the sun was shining on the flowers that grew round her. And she
walked on through the meadow until she came to a baker's oven
that was full of bread; and the bread called out to her, "Oh, take
me out, take me out, or I shall bm*n; I am baked enough aheadyl"
Then she drew near, and with the baker's peel she took out all the loaves one after the other. And she went farther on till she
came to a tree weighed down with apples, and it called out to her.
2i6 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
"Oh, shake me, shake me, we apples are all of us ripel" Then she shook the tree imtil the apples fell Hke rain, and she shook mitil
there were no more to fall; and when she had gathered them together in a heap, she went on farther.
At last she came to a little house, and an old woman was peeping
out of it, but she had such great teeth that the girl was terrified and
about to run away, only the old woman called her back. *What are you afraid of, my dear child? Come and live with me, and if you do
the house-work well and orderly, things shall go well with you.
You must take great pains to make my bed well, and shake it up
thoroughly, so that the feathers fly about, and then in the world it
snows, for I am Mother Hulda."* As the old woman spoke so kindly, the girl took courage, consented, and went to her work. She did everything to the old
woman's satisfaction, and shook the bed with such a will that the feathers flew about like snow-flakes; and so she led a good life, had
never a cross word, but boiled and roast meat every day. When she
had lived a long time with Mother Hulda, she began to feel sad,
not knowing herself what ailed her; at last she began to think she
must be home-sick; and although she was a thousand times better
off than at home where she was, yet she had a great longing to go
home. At last she said to her mistress, "I am home-sick, and al- though I am very well off here, I cannot stay any longer; I must go
back to my own home."
Mother Hulda answered, "It pleases me well that you should wish to go home, and, as you have served me faithfully, I will undertake to send you therel" She took her by the hand and led her to a large door standing
open, and as she was passing through it there fell upon her a heavy
shower of gold, and the gold himg all about her, so that she was covered with it.
"All this is yours, because you have been so industrious," said Mother Hulda; and, besides that, she returned to her her spindle,
the very same that she had dropped in the well. And then the door
was shut again, and the girl found herself back again in the world,
not far from her mother's house; and as she passed through the yard the cock stood on the top of the weU and cried,
"Cock-a-doodle doo!
Our golden girl has come home toor
• In Hesse, when it snows, they still say, "Mother Hulda is making her bed."
Mother Hulda 217
Then she went in to her mother, and as she had returned covered
with gold she was well received.
So the girl related all her history, and what had happened to her,
and when the mother heard how she came to have such great
riches she began to wish that her ugly and idle daughter might
have the same good fortune. So she sent her to sit by the well and
spin; and in order to make her spindle bloody she put her hand into
the thorn hedge. Then she threw the spindle into the well, and
jumped in herself. She foimd herself, hke her sister, in the beautiful
meadow, and followed the same path, and when she came to the
baker's oven, the bread cried out, "Oh, take me out, take me out, or
I shall bum; I am quite done already!"
But the lazy-bones answered, 'T have no desire to black my
hands," and went on farther. Soon she came to the apple tree, who
called out, "Oh, shake me, shake me, we apples are all of us ripel"
But she answered, "That is all very fine, suppose one of you should
fall on my head," and went on farther.
When she came to Mother Hulda's house she did not feel afraid, as she knew beforehand of her great teeth, and entered into her
service at once. The first day she put her hand well to the work,
and was industrious, and did everything Mother Hulda bade her,
because of the gold she expected; but the second day she began to
be idle, and the third day still more so, so that she would not get up
in the morning. Neither did she make Mother Hulda's bed as it ought to have been made, and did not shake it for the feathers to
fly about. So that Mother Hulda soon grew tired of her, and gave
her warning, at which the lazy thing was well pleased, and thought
that now the shower of gold was coming; so Mother Hulda led her
to the door, and as she stood in the doorway, instead of the shower
of gold a great kettle fuU of pitch was emptied over her.
"That is the reward for your service," said Mother Hulda, and shut the door. So the lazy girl came home all covered with pitch,
and the cock on the top of the well seeing her, cried,
"Cock-a-doodle dool
Our dirty girl has come home tool"
And the pitch remained sticking to her fast, and never, as long as
she lived, could it be got off.
The True Bride
There was once on a time a girl who was young and beautiful, but
she had lost her mother when she was quite a child, and her stepmother did all she could to make the girl's life wretched. Whenever this woman gave her anything to do, she worked at it indefatigably,
and did everything that lay in her power. Still she could not touch
the heart of the wicked woman by that; she was never satisfied; it
was never enough. The harder the girl worked, the more work was
put upon her, and all that the woman thought of was how to weigh
her down with still heavier burdens, and make her life still more
miserable.
One day she said to her, "Here are twelve pounds of feathers which you must pick, and if they are not done this evening, you
may expect a good beating. Do you imagine you can idle away the
whole day?" The poor girl sat down to the work, but tears ran down her cheeks as she did so, for she saw plainly enough that it
was quite impossible to finish the work in one day. Whenever she
had a Httle heap of feathers lying before her, and she sighed or
smote her hands together in her anguish, they flew away, and she
had to pick them out again, and begin her work anew. Then she
put her elbows on the table, laid her face in her two hands, and
cried, "Is there no one, then, on God's earth to have pity on me?"
Then she heard a low voice which said, "Be comforted, my child,
I have come to help you." The maiden looked up, and an old woman was by her side. She took the girl kindly by the hand, and
said, "Only tell me what is troubling you." As she spoke so kindly, the girl told her of her miserable Hfe, and how one burden after another was laid upon her, and she never could get to the end of the
work which was given to her. "If I have not done these feathers by this evening, my step-mother will beat me; she has threatened she
will, and I know she keeps her word." Her tears began to flow
again, but the good old woman said, "Do not be afraid, my child;
rest a while, arid in the meantime I wiU look to your work." The girl lay down on her bed, and soon fell asleep.
The old woman seated herself at the table with the feathers, and
how they did fly off the quills, which she scarcely touched with her
The True Bride 219
withered hands! The twelve pounds were soon finished, and when
the girl awoke, great snow-white heaps were lying, piled up, and
everything in the room was neatly cleared away, but the old
woman had vanished. The maiden thanked God, and sat still till
evening came, when the step-mother came in and marveled to see
the work completed. "Just look, you awkward creature," said she,
"what can be done when people are industrious; and why could you not set about something else? There you sit with your hands
crossed." When she went out she said, "The creatxure is worth more
than her salt. I must give her some work that is stiU harder."
Next morning she called the girl, and said, "There is a spoon for you. With that you must empty out for me the great pond which is
beside the garden, and if it is not done by night, you know what
will happen." The girl took the spoon, and saw that it was full of holes; but even if it had not been, she never could have emptied
the pond with it. She set to work at once, knelt down by the water,
into which her tears were falling, and began to empty it. But the
good old woman appeared again, and when she learnt the cause of
her grief, she said, "Be of good cheer, my child. Go into the thicket
and he down and sleep; I will soon do your work." As soon as the old woman was alone, she barely touched the
pond, and a vapor rose up on high from the water, and mingled itself with the clouds. Gradually the pond was emptied, and when
the maiden awoke before sunset and came thither, she saw nothing
but the fishes which were struggling in the mud. She went to her
step-mother, and showed her that the work was done. "It ought to
have been done long before this," said she, and grew white with anger, but she meditated something new.
On the third morning she said to the girl, "You must build me a
castle on the plain there, and it must be ready by the evening." The
maiden was dismayed, and said, "How can I complete such a great
work?" "I will endure no opposition," screamed the step-mother.
'If you can empty a pond with a spoon that is full of holes, you can build a castle too. I will take possession of it this very day, and if
anything is wanting, even if it be the most trifling thing in the
kitchen or cellar, you know what lies before you!" She drove the girl out, and when she entered the valley, the rocks were there,
piled up one above the other, and all her strength would not have
enabled her even to move the very smallest of them. She sat down
and wept, and still she hoped the old woman would help her. The
220 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
old woman was not long in coming; she comforted her and said,
"Lie down there in the shade and sleep, and I will soon build the castle for you. If it would be a pleasure to you, you can hve in 't
yourself." When the maiden had gone away, the old woman touched the
gray rocks. They began to rise, and immediately moved together as
if giants had built the walls; and on these the building arose, and it
seemed as if countless hands were working invisibly, and placing
one stone upon another. There was a dull heavy noise from the
ground; pillars arose of their own accord on high, and placed them- selves in order near each other. The tiles laid themselves in order
on the roof, and when noon-day came, the great weather-cock was
already turning itself on the summit of the tower, Hke a golden
figure of the Virgin with fluttering garments. The inside of the castle was being finished while evening was drawing near. How the
old woman managed it, I know not; but the walls of the room were
hung v^dth silk and velvet; embroidered chairs were there, and
richly ornamented arm-chairs by marble tables; crystal chandeliers
hung down from the ceilings and mirrored themselves in the
smooth pavement; green parrots were there in gilt cages, and so
were strange birds which sang most beautifully; and there was on
all sides as much magnificence as if a Idng were going to hve there.
The Sim was just setting when the girl awoke, and the brightness
of a thousand fights flashed in her face. She hurried to the castle,
and entered by the open door. The steps were spread with red
cloth, and the golden balustrade beset with flowering trees. When
she saw the splendor of the apartment, she stood as if turned to
stone. Who knows how long she might have stood there if she had
not remembered the step-mother. "Alasl" she said to herself, "if she could but be satisfied at last, and would give up making my life a
misery to me." The girl went and told her that the castle was ready.
*1 will move into it at once," said she, and rose from her seat. When they entered the castle, she was forced to hold her hand
before her eyes, the brilHancy of everything was so dazzling. "You
see," said she to the girl, 'liow easy it has been for you to do this; I
ought to have given you something harder." She went through aU the rooms, and examined every comer to see if anything was wanting or defective; but she could discover nothing. "Now we wiU go
down below," said she, looking at the girl with malicious eyes.
"The kitchen and the cellar still have to be examined, and if you
have forgotten anything you shall not escape punishment." But the
The True Bride 221
fire was burning on the hearth, and the meat was cooking in the
pans, the tongs and shovel were leaning against the wall, and the
shining brazen utensils all arranged in sight. Nothing was wanting,
not even a coal-box and water-pail. "Which is the way to the cellar?" she cried. "If that is not abundantly filled, it shall go ill with
you." She herself raised up the trap-door and descended; but she had hardly made two steps before the heavy trap-door which was
only laid back, fell down. The girl heard a scream, lifted up the
door very quickly to go to her aid, but she had fallen down, and the
girl found her lying lifeless at the bottom.
And now the magnificent castle belonged to the girl alone. She at
first did not know how to reconcile herself to her good fortune.
Beautiful dresses were hanging in the wardrobes, the chests were
filled with gold or silver, or with pearls and jewels, and she never
felt a desire that she was not able to gratify. And soon the fame
of the beauty and riches of the maiden went over all the world.
Wooers presented themselves daily, but none pleased her. At length
the son of the King came and he knew how to touch her heart, and
she betrothed herself to him. In the garden of the castle was a lime
tree, under which they were one day sitting together, when he said
to her, "I will go home and obtain my father's consent to our mar- riage. I entreat you to wait for me here under this lime tree; I shall
be back with you in a few hours." The maiden kissed him on his
left cheek, and said, "Keep true to me, and never let any one else Idss you on this cheek. I will wait here under the lime tree until you
return." The maid stayed beneath the lime tree until sunset, but he did
not return. She sat there three days from morning till evening, waiting for him, but in vain. As he still was not there by the fourth day,
she said, "Some accident has assuredly befallen him. I vwll go out
and seek him, and will not come back until I have found him." She
packed up three of her most beautiful dresses, one embroidered
Vidth bright stars, the second with silver moons, the third with
golden suns, tied up a handful of jewels in her handkerchief, and
set out. She inquired everywhere for her betrothed, but no one had
seen him; no one knew anything about him. Far and vidde did she
wander through the world, but she found him not. At last she hired
herself to a farmer as a cow-herd, and buried her dresses and
jewels beneath a stone.
And now she lived as a herdswoman, guarded her herd, and was
very sad and full of longing for her beloved one. She had a little
222 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
calf which she taught to know her, and fed it out of her own hand,
and when she said,
"Little calf, little calf, kneel by my side. And do not forget thy shepherd-maid, As the Prince forgot his betrothed bride.
Who waited for him 'neath the lime tree's shade."
the little calf knelt down, and she stroked it.
And when she had lived for a couple of years alone and full of
grief, a report was spread over all the land that the King's daughter was about to celebrate her marriage. The road to the town passed
through the village where the maiden was living, and it came to
pass that once when the maiden was driving out her herd, her
bridegroom traveled by. He was sitting proudly on his horse, and
never looked round, but when she saw him she recognized her beloved, and it was just as if a sharp knife had pierced her heart.
"Alasl" said she, *1 believed him true to me, but he has forgotten
me." Next day he again came along the road. When he was near her
she said to the little calf,
"Little calf, little calf, kneel by my side. And do not forget thy shepherd-maid. As the Prince forgot his betrothed bride.
Who waited for him 'neath the lime tree's shade."
When he was aware of the voice, he looked down and reined in
his horse. He looked into the herd's face, and then put his hands before his eyes as if he were trying to remember something, but he
soon rode onwards and was out of sight. "Alas!" said she, "he no
longer knows me," and her grief was ever greater. Soon after this a great festival three days long was to be held at
the King's court, and the whole country was invited to it.
"Now will I try my last chance," thought the maiden, and when evening came she went to the stone under which she had buried
her treasures. She took out the dress with the golden suns, put it on,
and adorned herself with the jewels. She let down her hair, which
she had concealed under a handkerchief, and it fell down in long
curls about her, and thus she went into the town, and in the darkness was observed by no one. When she entered the brightly
lighted hall, every one started back in amazement, but no one knew
who she was. The King's son went to meet her, but he did not rec- ognize her. He led her out to dance, and was so enchanted with her
The Three Little Birds 223
beauty, that he thought no more of the other bride. When the feast
was over, she vanished in the crowd, and hastened before daybreak
to the village, where she once more put on her herds dress.
Next evening she took out the dress with the silver moons, and
put a half -moon made of precious stones in her hair. When she appeared at the festival, all eyes were turned upon her, but the King's son hastened to meet her, and filled with love for her, danced with
her alone, and no longer so much as glanced at any one else. Before
she went away she was forced to promise him to come again to the
festival on the last evening.
When she appeared for the third time, she wore the stardress
which sparkled at every step she took, and her hair-ribbon and girdle were starred with jewels. The Prince had already been waiting
for her for a long time, and forced his way up to her. "Do but tell
who you are," said he, "I feel just as if I had already known you a
long time." "Do you not know what I did when you left me?" Then she stepped up to him, and kissed him on his left cheek, and in a
moment it was as if scales fell from his eyes, and he recognized the
true bride. "Come," said he to her, "here I stay no longer," gave her his hand, and led her dovioi to the carriage.
The horses hurried away to the magic castle as if the wind had
been harnessed to the carriage. The illuminated windows already
shone in the distance. When they drove past the lime tree, countless glow-worms were swarming about it. It shook its branches, and
sent forth their fragrance. On the steps flowers were blooming, and
the rooms echoed with the song of strange birds, but in the hall the
entire court was assembled, and the priest was waiting to marry the
bridegroom to the true bride.
The Three Little Birds
About a thousand or more years ago, there were in this country
nothing but small Kings, and one of them, who lived on the Keuterberg, was very fond of hunting. Once on a time when he was riding
forth from his castle with his huntsmen, three girls were watching
their cows upon the mountain, and when they saw the King with
all his followers, the eldest girl pointed to him, and called to the
two other girls, "Hilloal hilloal If I do not get that one, I will have
224 Grimms Complete Fairy Tales
none." Then the second girl answered from the other side of the
hill, and pointed to the one who was on the King's right hand,
"Hilloal hilloa! If I do not get that one, I will have none." And then the youngest pointed to the one who was on the left hand, and
cried, "Hilloal hilloa! If I do not get him I will have no one." These, however, were the two ministers.
The King heard aU this, and when he had come back from the
chase, he caused the three girls to be brought to him, and asked
them what they had said yesterday on the mountain. They would
not tell him that, so the King asked the eldest if she reaUy would
take him for her husband. Then she said "Yes," and the two min- isters married the two sisters, for they were aU three fair and beautiful of face, especially the Queen, who had hair Hke flax.
The two sisters had no children, and once when the King was
obHged to go from home he invited them to come to the Queen in
order to cheer her, for she was about to bear a child. She had a little boy who brought a bright red star into the world with him. The
two sisters said to each other that they would throw the beautiful
boy into the water. When they had thrown him in the river, a little
bird flew up into the air, which sang,
"To thy death art thou sped. Until Gods word he said.
In the white lily bloom.
Brave hoy, is thy tomh." When the two heard that, they were frightened to death, and ran
away in great haste. When the King came home they told him that
the Queen had been delivered of a dog. Then the King said, "What
God does, is well done!" But a fisherman who dwelt near the water fished the Httle boy out again while he was stiU aHve, and as his
wife had no children they reared him.
When a year had gone by, the King again went away, and the
Queen had another fittle boy, whom the false sisters likewise took
and threw into the water. Then up flew a little bird again and sang,
"To thy death art thou sped, Until Gods word he said.
In the white lily hloom.
Brave hoy, is thy tomh." And when the King came back, they told him that the Queen had
once more given birth to a dog, and he again said, "What God
does, is well done." The fisherman, however, fished this one also out of the water, and reared him.
The Three Little Birds 225
Then the King again journeyed forth, and the Queen had a little
girl, whom also the false sisters threw into the water. Then again a
little bird flew up on high and sang,
"To thy death art thou sped. Until Gods word he said.
In the white lily bloom.
Bonny girl, is thy tomb."
When the King came home they told him that the Queen had
been delivered of a cat. Then the King grew angry, and ordered his
wife to be cast into prison, and therein was she shut up for many
long years.
In the meantime the children had grown up. Then the eldest
once went out with some other boys to fish, but the other boys
would not have him with them, and said, "Go thy way, foimdling." Hereupon he was much troubled, and asked the old fisherman if
that was true. The fisherman told him that once when he was
fishing he had drawn him out of the water. So the boy said he
would go forth and seek his father. The fisherman, however, entreated him to stay, but he would not let himself be hindered, and
at last the fisherman consented. Then the boy went on his way and
walked for many days together, and at last he came to a great piece
of water by the side of which stood an old woman fishing.
"Good day, mother," said the boy. "Many thanks," said she. "You
will fish long enough before you catch anything." "And you will seek long enough before you find your father. How will you get
over the water?" said the woman. "God knows." Then the old woman took him up on her back and carried him
through it, and he sought for a long time, but could not find his fa- ther.
When a year had gone by, the second boy set out to seek his
brother. He came to the water, and all fared with him just as with
his brother. And now there was no one at home but the daughter,
and she mourned for her brothers so much that at last she also
begged the fisherman to let her set forth, for she wished to go in
search of her brothers. Then she likewise came to the great piece of
water, and she said to the old woman, "Good day, mother," "Many
thanks," replied the old woman. "May God help you with your
fishing," said the maiden. When the old woman heard that, she became quite friendly, and
carried her over the water, gave her a wand, and said to her, "Go, my daughter, ever onwards by this road, and when you come to a
226 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
great black dog, you must pass it silently and boldly, without either
laughing or looking at it. Then you will come to a great high castle,
on the threshold of which you must let the wand fall, and go
straight through the castle and out again on the other side. There
you wiU see an old fountain out of which a large tree has grown,
whereon hangs a bird in a cage which you must take down. Take
likewise a glass of water out of the fountain, and with these two
things go back by the same way. Pick up the wand again from the
threshold and take it with you, and when you again pass by the dog
strike him in the face with it, but be sure that you hit him, and then
just come back here to me." The maiden found everything exactly as the old woman had said,
and on her way back she foimd her two brothers who had sought
each other over half the world. They went together to the place
where the black dog was lying on the road; she struck it in the face,
and it turned into a handsome Prince who went with them to the
river. There the old woman was still standing. She rejoiced much to
see them again, and carried them all over the water, and then she
too went away, for now she was freed. The others, however, went
to the old fisherman, and all were glad that they had found each
other again, and they hung the bird on the wall.
But the second son could not settle at home, and took his crossbow and went a-hunting. When he was tired he took his flute, and
made music. The King, however, was hunting too, and heard that
and went thither, and when he met the youth, he said, "Who has
given you leave to hunt here?" "Oh, no one." "To whom do you belong, then?" "I am the fisherman's son." "But he has no children."
"If you will not believe, come with me." That the King did and questioned the fisherman, who told everything to him, and the httle bird on the waU began to sing,
"The mother sits alone There in the prison small,
O King of royal blood.
These are thy children all.
The sisters twain so false,
They wrought the children woe.
There in the waters deep
Where the fishermen come and go."
Then they were all terrified, and the King took the bird, the
fisherman and the three children back with him to the castle, and
ordered the prison to be opened and brought his wife out again.
The Three Snake-Leaves 227
She had, however, grown quite ill and weak. Then the daughter
gave her some of the water of the fountain to drink, and she be- came strong and healthy. But the two false sisters were burnt, and
the daughter married the Prince.
The Three Snake-Leaves
There was once a man who was so poor that he could hardly earn
enough to keep himself and his son from starving. One day the boy
said to him, "Dear father, I see you going about every day looking so sad and tired that I am determined to go out into the world and
try to earn my own living." So his father gave him his blessing and took leave of him with
many tears. Just at this time a great King was going to war with the
King of another country, and the youth took service under him and
marched to the battle-field as a soldier. In the first conflict with the
enemy he was in great danger and had a wonderful escape, for his comrades fell on each side of him. Their commander also was
wounded, and several were inclined to take flight and run from the
field. But the youth stepped forth to raise their courage, and cried,
"No, no, we will never allow our fatherland to sink to the groundl" Then they took courage and followed their young leader, who led
them forward, attacked and quickly vanquished the enemy. When
the King heard to whom he owed this great victory, he sent for the
youth, raised him to a position of great honor, gave him great treas- ures, and made him first in the kingdom next to himself.
Now the King had a daughter who was very beautiful, but she
was also very whimsical. She had made a vow that she would take
no man for a husband who did not promise that if she should die
he would allow himself to be buried alive with her in the grave. "If
he loves me," she said, "he wiU. not wish to outlive me." In return for this she would also promise to be buried in the grave with her
spouse should he die first.
This strange vow had hitherto frightened away all wooers, but
the young soldier was so struck with the beauty of the Princess that
he disregarded the vow, although her father warned him and said,
"Do you know what a terrible promise you will have to make?"
"Yes," replied the yoimg man, "I must be buried with her in the
228 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
grave if I outlive her. But my love for her is so strong, that I disregard that danger." Then the King gave his consent, and the mar- riage was celebrated with great pomp.
After they had lived together for some time in great happiness
and contentment, the young queen was seized with a terrible iUness
from which her physicians were unable to restore her. As she lay
dead, the yoimg husband remembered what he had promised and
the thought of lying in the grave alive filled him with horror, but
there was no escape. The King placed a watch at every outlet from
the castle, so that it was not possible to avoid his fate. When the
day of the funeral arrived and the body had been carried down and
placed in the royal vault, he was taken there also, and the door
firmly fastened with locks and bolts. Near to the coffin stood a table
upon which were four lights, four loaves of bread, and four bottles
of wine, and he knew that when these provisions came to an end,
he must starve. So he seated himself, feeling full of grief and sorrow, but with a determination to take only a small piece of bread
and the least drop of wine, to make them last.
One day when death seemed nearer than ever, he saw from a
comer of the vault just opposite to where he sat, a white snake
creep out and approach the body. He rose in horror, thinking it was
about to gnaw it, and drawing his sword, exclaimed, as with two
blows he cut the snake into three pieces, "As long as I live you shall not touch that." After a while a second snake crept out of the comer, but as soon
as he saw the other lying dead in three pieces, he went back and
quickly returned with three green leaves in his mouth. Then he
took the three separate portions of the snake, placed them together
and laid a leaf on each wound, and no sooner were they joined,
than the snake raised himself as lively as ever, and went away hastily with his companion.
The leaves remained lying on the groimd, and as he looked at
them, the thoughts of the poor unfortunate man were full of the
wonderful properties they possessed, and it suddenly occurred to
him that a leaf which could restore a dead snake to life, might be
useful to human beings. He stooped and picked up the leaves, then
advancing softly towards the body, he laid one on the mouth of the
dead, and the others on both the eyes. In a moment he saw the
efiFect of what he had done. The blood began to circulate in the
veins and blushed softly in the pale face and lips of his dead wife.
She drew a deep breath, opened her closed eyes and exclaimed
faintly, "Where am I?"
The Three Snake-Leaves 229
"You are with me, dear wife," answered her husband; and then he told her all that had happened, and how he had wakened her to life.
After taking a httle of the wine and bread she became stronger, and was able to rise from the bier and walk to the door of the vault
with her husband. Here they knocked and called loudly for a long
time, till at last the watchman heard them and word was sent to the
King, He came himself very quickly and ordered the door of the
vault to be opened. How astonished and joyful he was to find them
both alive and uninjured, and to know that his anxiety was overl
The whole matter had been a great trouble to him.
The three leaves, the young Prince took with him, and gave them
to a servant to take care of, saying, "Preserve them carefully for me, and see that they are safe every day; who knows what help
they may be to us in any future trouble?" A great change appeared in the wife of the young Prince after
this event— it was as if with her return to Hfe, all her love for her husband had vanished from her heart.
Not long after, he wished to take a voyage across the sea to see
his old father, and she accompanied him. While they were on board
ship, she forgot all the true and great love he had shown for her in
trying to restore her to life when she was dead, and made friends
with the captain, who was as wicked as herself.
One day when the young Prince lay asleep on deck, she called
the skipper to her and told him to take her husband by the feet,
while she raised his head, and before he was awake enough to save
himself, these two wicked people threw him overboard into the sea.
As soon as this shameful deed was accomplished, she said to the
skipper, "Now let us sail home again and say that the Prince has died on the voyage. I will praise and extol you so greatly to my fa- ther, that I know he will readily give his consent to our marriage,
and leave the crown to you after his death." But the faithful servant to whom the Prince had entrusted the
wonderful leaves saw all that his master's wife had done. Unnoticed, he lowered one of the boats from the ship's side, got on board and very soon discovered the body of the Prince. Dragging it hastily into the boat, he rowed away and soon left the traitors far
behind. As soon as he felt safely out of sight, he produced the pre- cious leaves which he always carried about with him, laid one on
each eye and one on the mouth of the dead man, who very quickly
showed signs of life, and was at last sufBciently restored to help in
rowing the boat. They both rowed with all their strength day and
230 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
night, and their httle bark flew so swiftly over the waves, that they
arrived at the King's palace long before his daughter and the cap- tain.
The King wondered greatly when he saw his son-in-law and the
servant enter, and asked them what had happened. But when he
heard of his daughter's wickedness, he said, "I can scarcely believe she would act so basely. However, the truth will soon be brought to
light. For the present, I advise you both to hide yourselves in a private chamber, and make yoiu^selves quite at home till the ship returns." The master and servant took the King's advice, and a few days
afterwards the large ship made its appearance, and the King's guilty daughter appeared before her father with a sorrowful coun- tenance.
"Why have you come back alone?" he asked. "Where is yoiu:
husband?"
"Ah! dear father," she replied, "I come home to you in great sor- row, for, during the voyage, my husband was taken suddenly ill
and died, and if the good captain had not stood by me and conducted me home, I cannot tell what evil might have happened to
me. He stood by my husband's deathbed, and he can tell you all
that occurred."
"OhI" said the King, "I can restore your dead husband to life
again, so do not grieve any longer." He threw open the door of the private room as he spoke, and told his son and the servant to come out.
When the wife saw her husband she was thunderstruck, and sank
on her knees imploring mercy.
"I can show you no mercy," said the King. "Your husband was not only ready to be buried and die with you, but he used the
means which restored you to hfe, and you have murdered him
while he slept, and shall receive the reward you so truly merit." Then was she with her accomplice placed in a boat full of holes,
and driven out to sea, where they were soon overwhelmed in the waves and drowned.
The White Snake
A LONG TIME ago there lived a King whose wisdom was noised
abroad in all the country. Nothing remained long miknown to him,
and it was as if the knowledge of hidden things was brought to him
in the air. However, he had one curious custom. Every day at dinner, after the table had been cleared and every one gone away, a
trusty servant had to bring in one other dish. But it was covered up,
and the servant himself did not know what was in it, and no one
else knew, for the King waited until he was quite alone before he uncovered the dish.
This had gone on a long time, but at last there came a day when
the servant could restrain his curiosity no longer, but as he was carrying the dish away he took it into his ov^oi room. As soon as he had
fastened the door securely, he lifted the cover, and there he saw a
white snake lying on the dish. After seeing it he could not resist the
desire to taste it, and so he cut off a small piece and put it in his
mouth. As soon as it touched his tongue he heard outside his window a strange chorus of delicate voices. He went and listened, and
found that it was the sparrows talking together, and telling each
other all they had seen in the fields and woods. The virtue of the
snake had given him power to understand the speech of animals.
Now it happened one day that the Queen lost her most splendid
ring, and suspicion fell upon the trusty servant, who had the general superintendence, and he was accused of stealing it. The King
summoned him to his presence, and after many reproaches told him
that if by the next day he was not able to name the thief he should
be considered guilty, and punished. It was in vain that he protested
his innocence; he could get no better sentence. In his uneasiness
and anxiety he went out into the courtyard, and began to consider
what he could do in so great a necessity. There sat the ducks by the
running water and rested themselves, and plixmed themselves with
their flat bills, and held a comfortable chat. The servant stayed
where he was and hstened to them. They told how they had waddled about all yesterday morning and found good food; and then
one of them said pitifully, "Something lies very heavy in my crawit is the ring that was lying under the Queen's window; I swallowed
it down in too great a hmrry."
232 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
Then the servant seized her by the neck, took her into the
kitchen, and said to the cook, "Kill this one, she is quite ready for
cooking.'' "Yes," said the cook, weighing it in her hand; "there will
be no trouble of fattening this one— it has been ready ever so long."
She then slit up its neck, and when it was opened the Queen's ring was found in its craw. The servant could now clearly prove his
innocence, and in order to make up for the injustice he had suffered
the King permitted him to ask some favor for himself, and also
promised him the place of greatest honor in the royal household.
But the servant refused it, and only asked for a horse and money
for traveling, for he had a fancy to see the world, and look about
him a little. So his request was granted, and he set out on his way;
and one day he came to a pool of water, by which he saw three
fishes who had got entangled in the rushes, and were panting for
water. Although fishes are usually considered dumb creatures, he
understood very well their lament that they were to perish so mis- erably; and as he had a compassionate heart he dismounted from
his horse, and put the three fishes back again into the water. They
quivered aU over with joy, stretched out their heads, and called out
to him, "We will remember and reward you, because you have delivered us." He rode on, and after a while he heard a small voice come up
from the sand underneath his horse's feet. He listened, and understood how an ant-ldng was complaining, "If only these men would keep off, with their great awkward beasts! Here comes this stupid
horse treading down my people with his hard hoofs!" The man then turned his horse to the side-path, and the ant-king
called out to him, "We will remember and reward you!" The path led him through a wood, and there he saw a fatherraven and mother-raven standing by their nest and throwing their
young ones out.
"Off with you! young gaUows-birds!" cried they; "we cannot stuff
you any more; you are big enough to fend for yourselves!" The poor young ravens lay on the ground, fluttering, and beating the air
with their pinions, and crying, "We are poor helpless things, we cannot fend for ourselves, we cannot even fly! We can only die of
hunger!" Then the kind young man dismounted, killed his horse with his
dagger, and left it to the young ravens for food. They came hopping up, feasted away at it, and cried, "We will remember, and reward you!" So now he had to use his own legs, and when he had gone a long
The White Snake 233
way he came to a great town. There was much noise and thronging
in the streets, and there came a man on a horse, who proclaimed,
"The King's daughter seeks a husband, but he who wishes to marry her must perform a difficult task, and if he cannot carry it through
successfully, he must lose his Hfe." Many had already tried, but had lost their Hves in vain. The
young man, when he saw the King's daughter, was so dazzled by her great beauty, that he forgot all danger, went to the King and offered himself as a wooer.
Then he was led to the sea-side, and a gold ring was thrown into
the water before his eyes. Then the King told him that he must
fetch the ring up again from the bottom of the sea, saying, "If you come back without it, you shall be put under the waves again and
again imtil you are drowned." Every one pitied the handsome young man, but they went, and
left him alone by the sea. As he was standing on the shore and
thinking of what he should do, there came three fishes swimming
by, none other than those he had set free. The middle one had a
mussel in his mouth, and he laid it on the strand at the young man's feet; and when he took it up and opened it there was the gold ring
inside! Full of joy he carried it to the King, and expected the
promised reward; but the King's daughter, proud of her high birth, despised him, and set him another task to perform. She went out
into the garden, and strewed about over the grass ten sacks full of
millet seed. "By the time the sun rises in the morning you must
have picked up all these," she said, "and not a grain must be
wanting." The young man sat down in the garden and considered how it
was possible to do this task, but he could contrive nothing, and
stayed there, feeling very sorrowful, and expecting to be led to
death at break of day. But when the first beams of the sun fell on
the garden he saw that the ten sacks were aU filled, standing one by
the other, and not even a grain was missing. The ant-king had arrived in the night with his thousands of ants, and the grateful creatures had picked up all the millet seed, and filled the sacks with
great industry. The King's daughter came herself into the garden and saw with astonishment that the young man had performed all
that had been given him to do. But she could not let her proud
heart melt, but said, "Although he has completed the two tasks, he shall not be my bridegroom unless he brings me an apple from the
tree of Hfe." The young man did not know where the tree of life was to be
234 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
found, but he set out and went on and on, as long as his legs could
carry him, but he had no hope of finding it. When he had gone
through three kingdoms he came one evening to a wood, and
seated himself under a tree to go to sleep; but he heard a rustling
in the boughs, and a golden apple fell into his hand. Immediately
three ravens flew towards him, perched on his knee, and said, "We are the three young ravens that you delivered from starving; when
we grew big, and heard that you were seeking the golden apple, we
flew over the sea to the end of the earth, where the tree of Me
stands, and we fetched the apple." Full of joy the yoimg man set off on his way home, and brought
the golden apple to the King's beautiful daughter, who was without any further excuse.
So they divided the apple of hfe, and ate it together; and their
hearts were filled with love, and they lived in undisturbed happiness to a great age.
The Three Spinners
There was once a girl who was lazy and would not spin, and her
mother could not persuade her to it, do what she would. At last the
mother became angry and out of patience, and gave her a good
beating, so that she cried out loudly. At that moment the Queen
was going by; as she heard the crying, she stopped; and, going into
the house, she asked the mother why she was beating her daughter,
so that every one outside in the street could hear her cries.
The woman was ashamed to tell of her daughter's laziness, so she
said, 'T cannot stop her from spinning; she is forever at it, and I am
poor and cannot furnish her with flax enough."
Then the Queen answered, "I Hke nothing better than the sound of the spinning-wheel, and always feel happy when I hear its himaming; let me take your daughter with me to the castle— I have
plenty of flax, she shall spin there to her heart's content." The mother was only too glad of the offer, and the Queen took
the girl with her. When they reached the castle the Queen showed
her three rooms which were filled with the finest flax as fuU as they
could hold.
*T^ow you can spin me this flax," said she, "and when you can
The Three Spinners 235
show it me all done you shall have my eldest son for bridegroom;
you may be poor, but I make nothing of that— your industry is
dowry enough." The girl was inwardly terrified, for she could not have spun the
flax, even if she were to live to be a hundred years old, and were to
sit spinning every day of her life from morning to evening. And
when she foimd herself alone she began to weep, and sat so for
three days without putting her hand to it. On the third day the
Queen came, and when she saw that nothing had been done of the
spinning she was much surprised; but the girl excused herself by
saying that she had not been able to begin because of the distress
she was in at leaving her home and her mother. The excuse contented the Queen, who said, however, as she went away, "Tomorrow you must begin to work." When the girl found herself alone again she could not tell how to
help herself or what to do, and in her perplexity she went and
gazed out of the window. There she saw three women passing by,
and the first of them had a broad flat foot, the second had a big
under-hp that hung down over her chin, and the third had a remarkably broad thumb. They all of them stopped in front of the win- dow, and called out to know what it was that the girl wanted. She
told them all her need, and they promised her their help, and said,
'Then will you invite us to your wedding, and not be ashamed of us, and call us your cousins, and let us sit at your table? If you will
promise this, we will finish off your flax-spinning in a very short
time." "With all my heart," answered the girl; "only come in now,
and begin at once." Then these same women came in, and she cleared a space in the
first room for them to sit and carry on their spinning. The first one
drew out the thread and moved the treadle that turned the wheel;
the second moistened the thread; the third twisted it, and rapped
with her finger on the table; and as often as she rapped a heap of
yam fell to the ground, and it was most beautifully spun. But the
girl hid the three spinsters out of the Queen's sight, and only showed her, as often as she came, the heaps of well-spun yarn; and
there was no end to the praises she received. When the first room
was empty they went on to the second, and then to the third, so
that at last all was finished. Then the three women took their leave,
saying to the girl, "Do not forget what you have promised, and it
will be all the better for you." So when the girl took the Queen and showed her the empty
rooms, and the great heaps of yam, the wedding was at once ar-
236 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
ranged, and the bridegroom rejoiced that he should have so clever
and diligent a wife, and praised her exceedingly.
"I have three cousins," said the girl, "and as they have shown me a great deal of kindness, I would not wish to forget them in my
good fortune; may I be allowed to invite them to the wedding, and
to ask them to sit at the table with us?"
The Queen and the bridegroom said at once, "There is no reason
against it." So when the feast began, in came the three spinsters in strange
guise, and the bride said, "Dear cousins, you are welcome."
"Oh," said the bridegroom, "how come you to have such dreadfully ugly relations?"
And then he went up to the first spinster and said, "How is is
that you have such a broad flat foot?" "With treading," answered
she, "with treading."
Then hc'went up to the second and said, "How is it that you
have such a great hanging Hp?" "With licking," answered she,
"with licking."
Then he asked the third, "How is it that you have such a broad
thumb?" "With twisting thread," answered she, "with twisting
thread." Then the bridegroom said that from that time forward his beautiful bride should never touch a spinning-wheel.
And so she escaped that tiresome flax-spinning.
Rumpelstiltskin
There was once a miller who was poor, but he had one beautiful
daughter. It happened one day that he came to speak with the
King, and, to give himself consequence, he told him that he had a
daughter who could spin gold out of straw. The King said to the
miller, "That is an art that pleases me well; if your daughter is as clever as you say, bring her to my castle tomorrow, that I may put
her to the proof." When the girl was brought to him, he led her into a room that
was quite full of straw, and gave her a wheel and spindle, and said,
"Now set to work, and if by the early morning you have not spun
Rumpelstiltskin 237
this straw to gold you shall die." And he shut the door himself, and left her there alone.
And so the poor miller's daughter was left there sitting, and could not think what to do for her life: she had no notion how to
set to work to spin gold from straw, and her distress grew so great
that she began to weep. Then all at once the door opened, and in
came a little man, who said, "Good evening, miller s daughter; why
are you crying?" "Oh!" answered the girl, "I have got to spin gold
out of straw, and I don't understand the business."
Then the little man said, "What will you give me if I spin it for
you?" "My necklace," said the girl. The little man took the necklace, seated himself before the
wheel, and whirr, whirr, whirr! three times round and the bobbin
was full; then he took up another, and whirr, whirr, whirr! three
times round, and that was full; and so he went on till the morning,
when all the straw had been spun, and all the bobbins were full of
gold. At sunrise came the King, and when he saw the gold he was
astonished and very much rejoiced, for he was very avaricious. He
had the miller's daughter taken into another room filled with straw, much bigger than the last, and told her that as she valued her life
she must spin it all in one night.
The girl did not know what to do, so she began to cry, and then
the door opened, and the little man appeared and said, "What will
you give me if I spin all this straw into gold?" "The ring from my
finger," answered the girl. So the little man took the ring, and began again to send the
wheel whirring round, and by the next morning all the straw was
spun into glistening gold. The King was rejoiced beyond measiu-e at the sight, but as he could never have enough of gold, he had the
miller's daughter taken into a still larger room full of straw, and
said, 'This, too, must be spun in one night, and if you accomplish it
you shall be my wife." For he thought, "Although she is but a
miller's daughter, I am not likely to find any one richer in the whole
world." As soon as the girl was left alone, the little man appeared for the
third time and said, "What will you give me if I spin the straw for
you this time?" "I have nothing left to give," answered the girl.
'Then you must promise me the first child you have after you are
Queen," said the little man.
"But who knows whether that will happen?" thought the girl; but as she did not know what else to do in her necessity, she promised the little man what he desired, upon which he began to spin.
238 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
until all the straw was gold. And when in the morning the King
came and found aU done according to his wish, he caused the wedding to be held at once, and the miUer's pretty daughter became a
Queen.
In a year's time she brought a fine child into the world, and thought no more of the Httle man; but one day he came suddenly
into her room, and said, "Now give me what you promised me." The Queen was terrified greatly, and ofiFered the Httle man all the
riches of the kingdom if he would only leave the child; but the little
man said, "No, I would rather have something hving than aU the
treasures of the world." Then the Queen began to lament and to weep, so that the little
man had pity upon her. "I wiU give you three days," said he, "and if at the end of that time you cannot tell my name, you must give
up the child to me." Then the Queen spent the whole night in thinking over all the
names that she had ever heard, and sent a messenger through the
land to ask far and wide for all the names that could be found. And
when the little man came next day, beginning with Caspar, Melchior, Balthazar, she repeated all she knew, and went through the
whole Hst, but after each the little man said, "That is not my
name." The second day the Queen sent to inquire of all the neighbors
what the servants were called, and told the Httle man all the most
unusual and singular names, saying, "Perhaps you are Roast-ribs, or
Sheepshanks, or Spindleshanks?" But he answered nothing but
"That is not my name."
The third day the messenger came back again, and said, *T have not been able to find one single new name; but as I passed through
the woods I came to a high hiU, and near it was a Httle house, and
before the house burned a fire, and round the fire danced a comical
Httle man, and he hopped on one leg and cried,
"Today do I bake, tomorrow I brew. The day after that the Queens child comes in;
And oh! I am glad that nobody knew
That the name I am called is Rumpelstiltskin!"
You cannot think how pleased the Queen was to hear that name,
and soon afterwards, when the Httle man walked in and said,
"Now, Mrs. Queen, what is my name?" she said at first, "Are you
called Jack?" "No," answered he. "Are you called Harry?" she
The Queen Bee 239
asked again. "No," answered he. And then she said, "Then perhaps your name is Rumpelstiltskinl"
"The devil told you that! the devil told you thatl" cried the little man, and in his anger he stamped with his right foot so hard that it
went into the ground above his knee; then he seized his left foot
with both his hands in such a fury that he split in two, and there was an end of him.
The Queen Bee
Two King's sons who sought adventures fell into a wild, reckless way of living, and gave up all thoughts of going home again. Their
third and youngest brother, who was called Witling, and had re- mained behind, started o£F to seek them; and when at last he found
them, they jeered at his simplicity in thinking that he could make
his way in the world, while they who were so much cleverer were
unsuccessful. But they all three went on together until they came to
an ant-hill, which the two eldest brothers wished to stir up, that
they might see the Httle ants hurry about in their fright and carrying off their eggs, but Witling said, "Leave the httle creatures
alone, I will not suffer them to be disturbed." And they went on farther until they came to a lake, where a
number of ducks were swimming about. The two eldest brothers
wanted to catch a couple and cook them, but WitHng would not
allow it, and said, "Leave the creatures alone, I will not suffer them
to be killed."
And then they came to a bee's-nest in a tree, and there was so much honey in it that it overflowed and ran down the trunk. The
two eldest brothers then wanted to make a fire beneath the tree,
that the bees might be stifled by the smoke, and then they could
get at the honey. But WitHng prevented them, saying, "Leave the
little creatures alone, I will not suffer them to be stifled." At last the three brothers came to a castle where there were in
the stables many horses standing, all of stone, and the brothers
went through all the rooms until they came to a door at the end secured with three locks, and in the middle of the door a small opening through which they could look into the room. And they saw a
little gray-haired man sitting at a table. They called out to him one,
240 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
twice, and he did not hear, but at the third time he got up, undid
the locks, and came out. Without speaking a word he led them to a
table loaded with aU sorts of good things, and when they had eaten
and drunk he showed to each his bed-chamber. The next morning
the little gray man came to the eldest brother, and beckoning him,
brought him to a table of stone, on which were written three things
directing by what means the castle could be delivered from its enchantment. The first thing was, that in the wood under the moss lay
the pearls belonging to the Princess— a thousand in nimfiber— and
they were to be sought for and collected, and if he who should undertake the task had not finished it by sunset— if but one pearl were
missing— he must be turned to stone. So the eldest brother went
out, and searched all day, but at the end of it he had only found
one hundred; just as was said on the table of stone came to pass and he was turned into stone. The second brother undertook the
adventure next day, but it fared with him no better than with the
first; he found two hundred pearls, and was turned into stone.
And so at last it was Witling's turn, and he began to search in the moss; but it was a very tedious business to find the pearls, and he
grew so out of heart that he sat down on a stone and began to
weep. As he was sitting thus, up came the ant-king with five thousand ants, whose fives had been saved through Witling's pity, and it was not very long before the Httle insects had collected aU the
pearls and put them in a heap.
Now the second thing ordered by the table of stone was to get
the key of the Princess's sleeping-chamber out of the lake. And when Witling came to the lake, the ducks whose fives he had saved
came swimming, and dived below, and brought up the key from the bottom.
The third thing that had to be done was the most diflBcult, and
that was to choose out the youngest and lovefiest of the three
Princesses, as they lay sleeping. AU bore a perfect resemblance
each to the other, and only differed in this, that before they went to
sleep each one had eaten a different sweetmeat— the eldest a piece
of sugar, the second a Httle syrup, and the third a spoonful of
honey. Now the Queen-bee of those bees that Witfing had pro- tected from the fire came at this moment, and trying the fips of all
three, settled on those of the one that had eaten honey, and so it
was that the Eling's son knew which to choose. Then the spell was broken; every one awoke from stony sleep, and took his right form
again.
And Witling married the yoimgest and lovefiest Princess, and
The Golden Goose 241
became King after her father's death. But his two brothers had to put up with the two other sisters.
The Golden Goose
There was a man who had three sons, the youngest of whom was
called the Simpleton, and was despised, laughed at, and neglected,
on every occasion. It happened one day that the eldest son wished
to go into the forest to cut wood, and before he went his mother
gave him a delicious pancake and a flask of wine, that he might not
suffer from hunger or thirst. When he came into the forest a Httle
old gray man met him, who wished him good day, and said, "Give me a bit of cake out of your pocket, and let me have a drink of your
wine; I an so hungry and thirsty."
But the prudent youth answered, "Give you my cake and my
wine? I haven't got any; be off with you." And leaving the little man standing there, he went off.
Then he began to feU a tree, but he had not been at it long before he made a wrong stroke, and the hatchet bit him in the arm, so
that he was obHged to go home and get it boimd up. That was
what came of the little gray man.
Afterwards the second son went into the wood, and the mother
gave to him, as to the eldest, a pancake and a flask of wine. The little old gray man met him also, and begged for a Httle bit of cake
and a drink of wine. But the second son spoke out plainly, saying,
*What I give you I lose myself, so be off with you." And leaving the little man standing there, he went off.
The punishment followed. As he was chopping away at the tree,
he hit himself in the leg so severely that he had to be carried home.
Then said the Simpleton, "Father, let me go for once into the forest to cut wood"; and the father answered, "Yoiur brothers have hiut themselves by so doing; give it up, you understand nothing
about it." But the Simpleton went on begging so long, that the father said
at last, "Well, be off with you; you will only learn by experience." The mother gave him a cake (it was only made with water, and
baked in the ashes), and with it a flask of sour beer. When he
came into the forest the little old gray man met him, and greeted
242 Grimms Complete Fairy Tales
him, saying, "Give me a bit of your cake, and a drink from your
flask; I am so hungry and thirsty."
And the Simpleton answered, "I have only a flour and water cake
and som- beer; but if that is good enough for you, let us sit down together and eat." Then they sat down, and as the Simpleton took out his floLir and water cake it became a rich pancake, and his sour beer
became good wine. Then they ate and drank, and afterwards the
little man said, "As you have such a kind heart, and share what you have so willingly, I v^dll bestow good luck upon you. Yonder stands
an old tree; cut it down, and at its roots you will find something," and thereupon the little man took his departure.
The Simpleton went there, and hewed away at the tree, and
when it fell he saw, sitting among the roots, a goose vwth feathers
of pure gold. He lifted it out and took it vvdth him to an inn where
he intended to stay the night.
The landlord had three daughters who, when they saw the goose,
were curious to know what wonderful kind of bird it was, and
ended by longing for one of its golden feathers. The eldest thought,
"I will wait for a good opportunity, and then I will pull out one of
its feathers for myself'; and so, when the Simpleton was gone out, she seized the goose by its vvdng— but there her finger and hand had to stay, held fast. Soon after came the second sister with the same
idea of plucking out one of the golden feathers for herself; but
scarcely had she touched her sister than she also was obliged to
stay, held fast. Lastly came the third with the same intentions; but
the others screamed out, "Stay away! for heaven's sake stay away!"
But she did not see why she should stay away, and thought, 'If
they do so, why should not I?" and went towards them. But when she reached her sisters there she stopped, hanging on wdth them.
And so they had to stay, all night.
The next morning the Simpleton took the goose under his arm
and went away, unmindful of the three girls that hung on to it. The
three had to run after him, left and right, wherever his legs carried
him. In the midst of the fields they met the parson, who, when he
saw the procession, said, "Shame on you, girls, running after a
young fellow through the fields Hke this," and forthwdth he seized hold of the youngest by the hand to drag her away, but hardly had
he touched her when he too was obliged to run after them himself.
Not long after the sexton came that way, and seeing the respected parson following at the heels of the three girls, he called
out, "Ho, your reverence, whither away so quickly? You forget that
we have another christening today"; and he seized hold of him by
The Golden Goose 243
his gown; but no sooner had he touched him than he was obliged to
follow on too. As the five tramped on, one after another, two peasants with their hoes came up from the fields, and the parson cried
out to them, and begged them to come and set him and the sexton
free, but no sooner had they touched the sexton than they had to
follow on too; and now there were seven following the Simpleton
and the goose.
By and by they came to a town where a King reigned, who had
an only daughter who was so serious that no one could make her
laugh; therefore the King had given out that whoever should make
her laugh should have her in marriage. The Simpleton, when he
heard this, went with his goose and his hangers-on into the presence of the King's daughter, and as soon as she saw the seven peo- ple following always one after the other, she burst out laughing,
and seemed as if she could never stop. And so the Simpleton earned
a right to her as his bride; but the King did not like him for a sonin-law and made all kinds of objections, and said he must first bring
a man who could drink up a whole cellar of wine.
The Simpleton thought that the little gray man would be able to
help him, and went out into the forest, and there, on the very spot
where he felled the tree, he saw a man sitting with a very sad countenance. The Simpleton asked him what was the matter, and he answered, "I have a great thirst, which I cannot quench: cold water does not agree with me; I have indeed drunk up a whole cask of
wine, but what good is a drop like that?"
Then said the Simpleton, 'T can help you; only come with me,
and you shall have enough."
He took him straight to the King's cellar, and the man sat himself down before the big vats, and drank, and drank, and before a day
was over he had drunk up the whole cellar-full. The Simpleton
again asked for his bride, but the King was annoyed that a
wretched fellow, called the Simpleton by everybody, should carry
off his daughter, and so he made new conditions. He was to produce a man who could eat up a mountain of bread. The Simpleton
did not hesitate long, but ran quickly off to the forest, and there in
the same place sat a man who had fastened a strap round his body,
making a very piteous face, and saying, "I have eaten a whole bakehouse full of rolls, but what is the use of that when one is so
hungry as I am? My stomach feels quite empty, and I am obliged
to strap myself together, that I may not die of hunger."
The Simpleton was quite glad of this, and said, "Get up quickly,
and come along with me, and you shall have enough to eat."
244 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
He led him straight to the King's courtyard, where all the meal in the kingdom had been collected and baked into a mountain of
bread. The man out of the forest settled himself down before it and
hastened to eat, and in one day the whole mountain had disappeared.
Then the Simpleton asked for his bride the third time. The King,
however, foimd one more excuse, and said he must have a ship that
should be able to sail on land or on water. "So soon," said he, "as you come sailing along with it, you shall have my daughter for your
wife." The Simpleton went straight to the forest, and there sat the little
old gray man with whom he had shared his cake, and he said, "1 have eaten for you, and I have drunk for you, I will also give you
the ship; and all because you were land to me at the JBrst." Then he gave him the ship that could sail on land and on water,
and when the King saw it he knew he could no longer withhold his
daughter. The marriage took place immediately, and at the death
of the King the Simpleton possessed the kingdom, and lived long
and happily with his wife.
The Three Feathers
There was once a King who had three sons. Two of them were con- sidered wise and prudent; but the youngest, who said very Httle,
appeared to others so silly that they gave him the name of Simple.
When the King became old and weak, and began to think that his
end was near, he knew not to which of his sons to leaA^ his kingdom.
So he sent for them, and said, "I have made a determination that whichever of you brings me the finest carpet shall be King after my
death." They immediately prepared to start on their expedition, and that
there might be no dispute between them, they took three feathers.
As they left the castle each blew a feather into air, and said, "We will travel in whatever direction these feathers take." One flew to the east, and the other to the west; but the third soon fell on the
earth and remained there. Then the two eldest brothers turned one
to the' right, and the other to the left, and they laughed at Simple because where his feather feU he was obliged to remain.
The Three Feathers 245
Simple sat down after his brothers were gone, feeling very sad;
but presently, looking round, he noticed near where his feather lay a
kind of trap-door. He rose quickly, went toward it, and lifted it up. To his surprise he saw a flight of steps, down which he descended,
and reached another door; hearing voices within he knocked hastily. The voices were singing,
"Little frogs, crooked legs. Where do you hide? Go and see quickly
Who is outside."
At this the door opened of itself, and the youth saw a large fat
frog seated with a niunber of little frogs round her.
On seeing him the large frog asked what he wanted. "I have a
great wish for the finest and most beautiful carpet that can be got," he replied. Then the old frog called again to her little ones,
"Little frogs, crooked legs. Run here and there;
Bring me the large hag
That hangs over there."
The young frogs fetched the bag, and when it was opened the
old frog took from it a carpet so fine and so beautifully worked that
nothing on earth could equal it. This she gave to the young man,
who thanked her and went away up the steps.
Meanwhile, his elder brothers, quite believing that their foolish
brother would not be able to get any carpet at all, said one to another, "We need not take the trouble to go further and seek for
anything very wonderful; ours is sure to be the best." And as the
first person they met was a shepherd, wearing a shepherd's plaid, they bought the large plaid cloth and carried it home to the King.
At the same time the younger brother returned with his beautiful
carpet, and when the King saw it he was astonished, and said, 'If
justice is done, then the kingdom belongs to my youngest son." But the two elder brothers gave the King no peace; they said it
was impossible for Simple to become King, for his understanding
failed in everything, and they begged their father to make another condition.
At last he said, "Whoever finds the most beautiful ring and
brings it to me shall have the kingdom." Away went the brothers a second time, and blew three feathers
into the air to direct their ways. The feathers of the elder two flew
246 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
east and west, but that of the youngest fell, as before, near the trapdoor and there rested. He at once descended the steps, and told the
great frog that he wanted a most beautiful ring. She sent for her
large bag and drew from it a ring which sparkled with precious
stones, and was so beautiful that no goldsmith on earth could make one like it.
The elder brothers had again laughed at Simple when his feather
fell so soon to the ground, and forgetting his former success with
the carpet, scorned the idea that he could ever find a gold ring. So
they gave themselves no trouble, but merely took a plated ring
from the harness of a carriage horse, and brought it to their father.
But when the King saw Simple's splendid ring he said at once,
"The kingdom belongs to my youngest son." His brothers, however, were not yet inclined to submit to the decision; they begged their father to make a third condition, and at
last he promised to give the kingdom to the son who brought home the most beautiful woman to be his wife.
They all were again guided by blowing the feathers, and the two
elder took the roads pointed out to them. But Simple, without hesitation, went at once to the frog, and said, "This time I am to take home the most beautiful woman."
"Hey-dayl" said the frog. "I have not one by me at present, but
you shall have one soon." So she gave him a carrot which had been hollowed out, and to which six mice were harnessed.
Simple took it quite sorrowfully, and said, "What am I to do with
this?" "Seat one of my little frogs in it," she said. The youth, on this, caught one up at a venture, and seated it in
the carrot. No sooner had he done so than it became a most beautiful young lady; the carrot was turned into a gilded coach; and the
mice were changed to prancing horses.
He kissed the maiden, seated himself in the carriage with her,
drove away to the castle, and led her to the King.
Meanwhile his brothers had proved more silly than he; not forgetting the beautiful carpet and the ring, they still thought it was
impossible for Simple to find a beautiful woman also. They therefore took no more trouble than before, and merely chose the handsomest peasant maideas they could find to bring to their father.
When the King saw the beautiful maiden his youngest son had
brought he said, "The kingdom must now belong to my youngest
son after my death."
But the elder brothers deafened the King's ears with their cries,
"We cannot consent to let our stupid brother be King. Give us one
The Hut in the Forest 247
more trial. Let a ring be hung in the hall, and let each woman
spring through it." For they thought the peasant maidens would easily manage to do this, because they were strong, and that the
delicate lady would, no doubt, kill herself. To this trial the old King consented.
The peasant maidens jumped first; but they were so heavy Eind
awkward that they feU, and one broke her arm and the other her
leg. But the beautiful lady whom Simple had brought home sprang
as lightly as a deer through the ring, and thus put an end to aU opposition.
The yoimgest brother married the beautiful maiden, and after his
father's death ruled the kingdom for many years with wisdom and equity.
The Hut in the Forest
A POOR WOOD-CUTTER livcd with his wife and three daughters in a
little hut on the edge of a lonely forest. One morning as he was
about to go to his work, he said to his wife, "Let my dinner be brought into the forest to me by my eldest daughter, or I shaU
never get my work done, and in order that she may not miss her
way," he added, "I will take a bag of millet with me and strew the
seeds on the path." When, therefore, the sun was just above the center of the forest, the girl set out on her way with a bowl of soup,
but the field-sparrows, and wood-sparrows, larks and finches, blackbirds and siskins had picked up the miUet long before, and the girl
could not find the track. Then, trusting to chance, she went on and
on until the sun sank and night began to fall. The trees rustled in
the darkness, the owk hooted, and she began to be afraid. Then in
the distance she perceived a light which glimmered between the
trees. "There ought to be some people living there who can take
me in for the night," thought she, and went up to the light. It was not long before she came to a house the windows of which
were all lighted up. She knocked, and a rough voice from the inside
cried, "Come in." The girl stepped into the dark entrance, and
knocked at the door of the room. "Just come in," cried the voice, and when she opened the door, an old gray-haired man was sitting
at the table, supporting his face with both hands, and his white
248 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
beard fell down over the table almost as far as the ground. By the
stove lay three animals, a hen, a cock, and a brindled cow. The girl
told her story to the old man, and begged for shelter for the night.
The man said,
"Pretty little hen. Pretty little cock.
And pretty brindled cow.
What say ye to thatF'
"Duks," answered the animals, and that must have meant, "We are
wilUng," for the old man said, "Here you shall have shelter and
food; go to the fire, and cook us our supper," The girl found in the kitchen abundance of everything, and cooked a good supper, but
had no thought of the animals. She carried the full dishes to the
table, seated herself by the gray-haired man, ate and satisfied her
hunger. When she had had enough, she said, "But now I am tired,
where is there a bed in which I can lie down, and sleep?" The ani- mals repHed,
"Thou hast eaten with him. Thou hast drunk with him.
Thou hast had no thought for us.
So find out for thyself where thou canst pass the night."
Then said the old man, "Just go upstairs, and you will find a room with two beds, shake them up, and put white Hnen on them, and
then I, too, will come and He down to sleep." The girl went up, and when she had shaken the beds and put clean sheets on, she lay
down in one of them without waiting any longer for the old man.
After some time, however, the gray-haired man came, took his candle, looked at the girl and shook his head. When he saw that she
had fallen into a sound sleep, he opened a trap-door, and let her down into the cellar.
Late at night the wood-cutter came home, and reproached his
wife for leaving him to hunger all day. 'It is not my fault," she
replied, "the girl went out with your dinner, and must have lost
herself, but she is sure to come back tomorrow." The wood-cutter, however, arose before dawn to go into the forest, and requested
that the second daughter should take him his dinner that day. "I
will take a bag with lentils," said he; "the seeds are larger than
millet, the girl will see them better, and can't lose her way." At dinner-time, therefore, the girl took out the food, but the lentils had
disappeared. The birds of the forest had picked them up as they
The Hut in the Forest 249
had done the day before, and had left none. The girl wandered
about in the forest until night, and then she, too, reached the house
of the old man, was told to go in, and begged for food and a bed.
The man with the white beard again asked the animals,
"Pretty little hen. Pretty little cock.
And pretty brindled cow,
What say ye to that?"
The animals again replied "Duks," and everything happened just as it had happened the day before. The girl cooked a good meal, ate
and drank with the old man, and did not concern herself about the
animals, and when she inquired about her bed they answered,
"Thou hast eaten with him. Thou hast drunk with him.
Thou hast had no thought for us.
So find out for thyself where thou canst pass the night."
When she was asleep the old man came, looked at her, shook his
head, and let her down into the cellar.
On the third morning the wood-cutter said to his wife, "Send our youngest child out with my dinner today, she has always been good
and obedient, and will stay in the right path, and not run about
after every wild bumble-bee, as her sisters did." The mother did not
want to do it, and said, "Am I to lose my dearest child, as well?"
"Have no fear," he repUed, "the girl will not go astray; she is too prudent and sensible; besides I will take some peas with me, and
strew them about. They are stiU larger than lentils, and will show
her the way." But when the girl went out with her basket on her arm, the wood-pigeons had already got all the peas in their crops,
and she did not know which way she was to turn. She was full of
sorrow and never ceased to think how hungry her father would be,
and how her good mother would grieve, if she did not go home. At
length when it grew dark, she saw the light and came to the house
in the forest. She begged quite prettily to be allowed to spend the
night there, and the man with the white beard once more asked his
animals,
"Pretty little hen. Pretty little cock.
And pretty brindled cow,
What say ye to that?"
"Duks," said they. Then the girl went to the stove where the ani-
250 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
mals were lying, and petted the cock and hen, and stroked their
smooth feathers with her hand, and caressed the brindled cow between her horns, and when, in obedience to the old man's orders, she had made ready some good soup, and the bowl was placed
upon the table, she said, "Am I to eat as much as I want, and the good animals to have nothing? Outside is food in plenty, I will look
after them first." So she went and brought some barley and strewed it for the cock and hen, and a whole armful of sweet-smelling hay
for the cow. "I hope you will Hke it, dear animals," said she, "and
you shall have a refreshing draught in case you are thirsty." Then she fetched in a bucketful of water, and the cock and hen jumped
on to the edge of it and dipped their beaks in, and then held up
their heads as the birds do when they drink, and the brindled cow
also took a hearty draught. When the animals were fed, the girl
seated herself at the table by the old man, and ate what he had left.
It was not long before the cock and the hen began to thrust their
heads beneath their wings, and the eyes of the cow Hkewise began
to bHnk. Then said the girl, "Ought we not to go to bed?
"Pretty little hen. Pretty little cock.
And beautiful brindled cow.
What say ye to that?"
The animals answered "Dulcs,
"Thou hast eaten with us, Thou hast drunk with us,
Thou hast had kind thought for all of us.
We uAsh thee good-night."
Then the maiden went upstairs, shook the feather-beds, and laid
clean sheets on them, and when she had done it the old man came
and lay dovini on one of the beds, and his white beard reached
down to his feet. The girl lay down on the other, said her prayers,
and fell asleep.
She slept quietly till midnight, and then there was such a noise in
the house that she awoke. There was a sound of cracking and sphtting in every comer, and the doors sprang open, and beat against
the walls. The beams groaned as if they were being torn out of
their joints, it seemed as if the staircase were falling down, and at
length there was a crash as if the entire roof had fallen in. As, however, all grew quiet once more, and the girl was not hurt, she
stayed quietly lying where she was, and fell asleep again. But when
Donkey Cabbages 251
she woke up in the morning with the brilliancy of the sunshine,
what did her eyes behold? She was lying in a vast hall, and everything around her shone with royal splendor; on the walls, golden
flowers grew up on a ground of green silk, the bed was of ivory,
and the canopy of red velvet, and on a chair close by, was a pair of
shoes embroidered wdth pearls.
The girl believed that she was in a dream, but three richly clad
attendants came in, and asked what orders she would Hke to give.
"If you will go," she replied, "I v^dll get up at once and make ready some soup for the old man, and then I will feed the pretty little
hen, and the cock, and the beautiful brindled cow." She thought the old man was up already, and looked round at his bed; he, however, was not lying in it, but a stranger. And while she was looking
at him, and becoming aware that he was young and handsome, he
awoke, sat up in bed, and said, "1 am a King's son, and was be- wdtched by a wicked witch, and made to live in this forest, as an
old gray-haired man; no one was allowed to be with me but my three attendants in the form of a cock, a hen, and a brindled cow.
The spell was not to be broken until a girl came to us whose heart
was so good that she showed herself full of love, not only towards
mankind, but towards animals— and that thou hast done, and by
thee at midnight we were set free, and the old hut in the forest was
changed back again into my royal palace." And when they had
arisen, the King's son ordered the three attendants to set out and fetch the father and mother of the girl to the marriage feast.
"But where are my two sisters?" inquired the maiden. "I have locked them in the cellar, and tomorrow they shall be led into the
forest, and shall live as servants to a charcoal-burner, until they
have grown kinder, and do not leave poor animals to suffer hunger."
Donkey Cabbages
There was once a young huntsman who went into the forest to lie
in wait. He had a fresh and joyous heart, and as he was going
thither, whistling upon a leaf, an ugly old crone came up, who
spoke to him and said, "Good-day, dear huntsman, truly you are merry and contented, but I am suffering from hunger and thirst, do
give me an alms." The huntsman had compassion on the poor old
252 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
creature, felt in his pocket, and gave her what he could afford. He
was then about to go further, but the old woman stopped him and
said, "Listen, dear huntsman, to what I tell you; I wiU make you a present in return for your kindness. Go on your way now, but in a
little while you will come to a tree, whereon nine birds axe sitting
which have a cloak in their claws, and are plucking at it; take your
gun and shoot into the midst of them, they will let the cloak fall
down to you, but one of the birds will be hurt, and will drop down
dead. Carry away the cloak, it is a wishing-cloak; when you throw
it over your shoulders, you only have to wish to be in a certain
place, and you wiU be there in the twinkling of an eye. Take out
the heart of the dead bird and swaUow it whole, and every morning
early, when you get up, you wiU find a gold piece under your
pillow." The huntsman thanked the wise woman, and thought to himself,
*Those are fine things that she has promised me, if aU does but
come true." And verily when he had walked about a hundred paces, he heard in the branches above him such a screaming and
twittering that he looked up and saw there a crowd of birds who
were tearing a piece of cloth about with their beaks and claws, and
tugging and fighting as if each wanted to have it all to himself.
"Well," said the huntsman, "this is wonderful; it has really come to
pass just as the old wife foretoldl" and he took the gun from his shoulder, aimed and fired right into the midst of them, so that the
feathers flew about. The birds instantly took to flight with loud outcries, but one dropped down dead, and the cloak fell at the same
time. Then £he huntsman did as the old woman directed him, cut
open the bird, sought the heart, swallowed it down, and took the cloak home with him.
Next morning, when he awoke, the promise occurred to him, and
he wished to see if it also had been fulfilled. When he lifted up the
pillow, the gold piece shone in his eyes, and next day he ^ound another, and so it went on, every time he got up. He gathered together a heap of gold, but at last he thought, "Of what use is aU my
gold to me if I stay at home? I wiU go forth and see the world."
He then took leave of his parents, buckled on his huntsman's pouch and gun, and went out into the world. It came to pass, that
one day he traveled through a dense forest, and when he came to
the end of it, in the plain before him stood a fine castle. An old
woman was standing with a wonderfully beautiful maiden, looking
out of one of the windows. The old woman, however, was a witch
and said to the maiden, "There comes one out of the forest, who
Donkey Cabbages 253
has a wonderful treasure in his body, we must filch it from him, my
dear daughter, it is more suitable for us than for him. He has a
bird's heart about him, by means of which a gold piece lies every
morning under his piUow." She told her what she was to do to get it, and what part she had to play, and finally threatened her, and
said with angry eyes, "And if you do not attend to what I say, it
will be the worse for you." Now when the huntsman came nearer
he descried the maiden, and said to himself, "I have traveled about for such a long time, I will take a rest for once, and enter that beautiful castle. I have certainly money enough." Nevertheless, the real reason was that he had caught sight of the pretty girl.
He entered the house, and was well received and courteously entertained. Before long he was so much in love v/iih. the young witch
that he no longer thought of anything else, and only saw things as
she saw them, and did what she desired. The old woman then said,
"Now we must have the bird's heart, he will never miss it." She prepared a drink, and when it was ready, poured it into a cup and
gave it to the maiden, who was to present it to the himtsman. She
did so, saying, "Now, my dearest, drink to me." So he took the cup, and when he had swallowed the draught, he brought up the heart
of the bird. The girl had to take it away secretly and swallow it
herself, for the old woman would have it so. Thenceforward he
found no more gold under his pillow, but it lay instead under that
of the maiden, from whence the old woman fetched it away every
morning; but he was so much in love and so befooled, that he
thought of nothing else but of passing his time with the girl.
Then the old witch said, "We have the bird's heart, but we must
also take the wishing-cloak away from him." The girl answered,
"We will leave him that, he has lost his wealth." The old woman
was angry and said, "Such a mantle is a wonderful thing, and is seldom to be found in this world. I must and vvdll have itl" She gave the girl several blows, and said that if she did not obey, it should
fare ill with her. So she did the old woman's bidding, placed herself at the window and looked on the distant country, as if she were
very sorrowful. The huntsman asked, *Why dost thou stand there
so sorrowfully?" "Ah, my beloved," was her answer, "over yonder Hes the Garnet Mountain, where the precious stones grow. I long for
them so much that when I think of them, I feel quite sad, but who
can get them? Only the birds; they fly and can reach them, but a
man, hever." "Have you nothing else to complain of?" said the
huntsman. "I will soon remove that burden from your heart." With that he drew her under his mantle, wished himself on the
254 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
Garnet Mountain, and in the twinkling of an eye they were sitting
on it together. Precious stones were glistening on every side so that
it was a joy to see them, and together they gathered the finest and
costliest of them. Now, the old woman had, through her sorceries,
contrived that the eyes of the huntsman should become heavy. He
said to the maiden, ''We will sit down and rest awhile, I am so
tired that I can no longer stand on my feet." Then they sat down, and he laid his head in her lap, and fell asleep. When he was
asleep, she imfastened the mantle from his shoulders, and wrapped
herself in it, picked up the garnets and stones, and wished herself back at home with them.
But when the himtsman had had his sleep out and awoke, and
perceived that his sweetheart had betrayed him, and left him alone
on the vwld mountain, he said, "Oh, what treachery there is in the
world!" and sat dovioi there in care and sorrow, not knowing what to do. But the mountain belonged to some wild and monstrous gi- ants who dwelt thereon and lived their Hves there, and he had not
sat long before he saw three of them coming towards him, so he lay
down as if he were sunk in a deep sleep. Then the giants came up,
and the first kicked him v^dth his foot and said, "What sort of an
earth-worm is lying curled up here?" The second said, "Step upon
him and kill him." But the third said, "That would indeed be worth your while; just let him live, he cannot remain here; and when he
climbs higher, towards the summit of the mountain, the clouds wdll
lay hold of him and bear him away." So saying they passed by. But the huntsman had paid heed to their words, and as soon as they
were gone, he rose and climbed up to the summit of the mountain,
and when he had sat there a while, a cloud floated towards him,
caught him up, carried him away, and traveled about for a long
time in the heavens. Then it sank lower, and let itself dov^ni on a
great cabbage-garden, girt round by walls, so that he came softly to
the ground on cabbages and vegetables.
Then the huntsman looked about him and said, 'If I only had something to eat! I am so hungry, and my hunger will increase in
course of time; but I see here neither apples nor pears, nor any
other sort of fruit, everywhere nothing but cabbages." At length he
thought, "At a pinch I can eat some of the leaves, they do not taste
particularly good, but they will refresh me." With that he picked himself out a fine head of cabbage, and ate it, but scarcely had he
swallowed a couple of mouthfuls than he felt very strange and
quite different.
Four legs grew on him, a large head and two thick ears, and he
Donkey Cabbages 255
saw with horror that he was changed into an ass. Still as his hunger
increased every minute, and as the juicy leaves were suitable to his
present nature, he went on eating with great zest. At last he arrived
at a different land of cabbage, but as soon as he had swallowed it,
he again felt a change, and reassumed his former human shape.
Then the huntsman lay down and slept off his fatigue. When he
awoke next morning, he broke off one head of the bad cabbages
and another of the good ones, and thought to himself, "This shall
help me to get my own again and to punish treachery." Then he took the cabbages with him, climbed over the wall, and went forth
to seek for the castle of his sweetheart. After wandering about for a
couple of days he was lucky enough to find it again. He dyed his
face brown, so that his own mother would not have known him;
and begged for shelter. "I am so tired," said he, "that I can go no
further." The witch asked, "Who are you, countryman, and what is
your business?" "I am a King's messenger, and was sent out to seek the most delicious salad which grows beneath the sun. I have even
been so fortunate as to find it, and am carrying it about with me;
but the heat of the sun is so intense that the deUcate cabbage
threatens to wither, and I do not know if I can carry it any further." When the old woman heard of the exquisite salad, she was
greedy, and said, "Dear countryman, let me just taste this wonderful salad." "Why not?" answered he, '1 have brought two heads
with me, and will give you one of them," and he opened his pouch and handed her the bad cabbage. The vwtch suspected nothing
amiss, and her mouth watered so for this new dish that she herself
went into the kitchen and dressed it. When it was prepared she
could not wait until it was set on the table, but took a couple of
leaves at once, and put them in her mouth, but hardly had she
swallowed them than she was deprived of her human shape, and
she ran out into the courtyard in the form of an ass.
Presently the maid-servant entered the kitchen, saw the salad
standing there ready prepared, and was about to carry it up; but on
the way, according to habit, she was seized by the desire to taste,
and she ate a couple of leaves. Instantly the magic power showed
itself, and she likewise became an ass and ran out to the old
woman, and the dish of salad fell to the ground. Meantime the messenger sat beside the beautiful girl, and as no one came with the
salad and she also was longing for it, she said, "I don't know what
has become of the salad-" The huntsman thought, 'The salad must
have already taken effect," and said, "I will go to the kitchen and
inquire about it." As he went down he saw the two asses running
256 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
about in the courtyard; the salad, however, was lying on the
ground. "All right," said he, "the two have taken their portion," and he picked up the other leaves, laid them on the dish, and carried
them to the maiden. "I. bring you the delicate food myself," said he,
"in order that you may not have to wait longer." Then she ate of it, and was, Hke the others, immediately deprived of her human
form, and ran out into the courtyard in the shape of an ass.
After the huntsman had washed his face, so that the transformed
ones could recognize him, he went down into the courtyard, and
said, "Now you shall receive the wages of your treachery," and boimd them together, aU three with one rope, and drove them
along until he came to a mill. He knocked at the window, the miller
put out his head, and asked what he wanted. "I have three unmanageable beasts," answered he, "which I don't want to keep any longer. Will you take them in, and give them food and stable room,
and manage them as I tell you, and then I will pay you what you
ask." The miller said, "Why not? but how am I to manage them?" The huntsman then said that he was to give three beatings and one
meal daily to the old donkey, and that was the witch; one beating
and three meals to the younger one, which was the servant-girl;
and to the youngest, which was the maiden, no beatings and three
meals, for he could not bring himself to have the maiden beaten.
After that he went back into the castle, and foimd therein everything he needed.
After a couple of days, the miller came and said he must inform
him that the old ass which had received three beatings and only
one meal daily was dead; "the two others," he continued, "are cer- tainly not dead, and are fed three times daily, but they are so sad
that they cannot last much longer." The huntsman was moved to pity, put away his anger, and told the miller to drive them back
again to him. And when they came, he gave them some of the good
salad, so that they became human again. The beautiful girl fell on
her knees before him, and said, "Ah, my beloved, forgive me for the evil I have done you; my mother drove me to it; it was done
against my wdll, for I love you dearly. Your vidshing-cloak hangs in
a cupboard, and as for the bird's-heart I will take a vomiting potion." But he thought otherwise, and said, "Keep it; it is all the
same, for I will take you for my true wife." So the wedding was cel- ebrated, and they Hved happily together until their death.
Snow-White and Rose-Red
There was once a poor widow who lived in a lonely cottage. In
front of the cottage was a garden wherein stood two rose trees, one of which bore white and the other red roses. She had two children
who were like the two rose trees, and one was called Snow-white,
and the other Rose-red. They were as good and happy, as busy and
cheerful as ever two children in the world were, only Snow-white
was more quiet and gentle than Rose-red. Rose-red liked better to run about in the meadows and fields seeking flowers and catching
butterflies; but Snow-white sat at home with her mother, and
helped her with her house-work, or read to her when there was nothing to do.
The two children were so fond of each other that they always
held each other by the hand when they went out together, and
when Snow-white said, "We will not leave each other," Rose-red
answered, "Never so long as we Hve," and their mother would add, "What one has she must share with the other." They often ran about the forest alone and gathered red berries,
and no beasts did them any harm, but came close to them trustfully. The Httle hare would eat a cabbage-leaf out of their hands,
the roe grazed by their side, the stag leapt merrily by them, and the
birds sat still upon the boughs, arid sang whatever they knew.
No mishap overtook them; if they had stayed too late in the forest, and night came on, they laid themselves down near one another
upon the moss, and slept until morning came, and their mother knew this and had no distress on their account.
Once when they had spent the night in the wood and the dawn
had roused them, they saw a beautiful child in a shining white
dress sitting near their bed. He got up and looked quite kindly at
them, but said nothing and went away into the forest. And when
they looked round they found that they had been sleeping quite
close to a precipice, and would certainly have fallen into it in the
darkness if they had gone only a few paces further. And their
mother told them that it must have been the angel who watches
over good children.
Snow-white and Rose-red kept their mother's little cottage so
neat that it was a pleasure to look inside it. In the summer Rose-red
258 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
took care of the house, and every morning laid a wreath of flowers
by her mother's bed before she awoke, in which was a rose from each tree. In the winter Snow-white lit the fire and hung the kettle
on the hob. The kettle was of copper and shone Hke gold, so
brightly was it polished. In the evening, when the snowflakes fell,
the mother said, "Go, Snow-white, and bolt the door," and then they sat round the hearth, and the mother took her spectacles and
read aloud out of a large book, and the two girls Hstened as they sat
and spim. And close by them lay a lamb upon the floor, and behind
them upon a perch sat a white dove v^th its head hidden beneath
its wings.
One evening, as they were thiis sitting comfortably together, some one knocked at the door as if he wished to be let in. The
mother said, "Quick, Rose-red, open the door, it must be a traveler
who is seeking shelter." Rose-red went and pushed back the bolt, thinking that it was a poor man, but it was not; it was a bear that
stretched his broad, black head vidthin the door.
Rose-red screamed and sprang back, the lamb bleated, the dove
fluttered, and Snow-white hid herself behind her mother's bed. But
the bear began to speak and said, "Do not be afraid, I •wiU do you no harm! I am heilf-frozen, and only want to warm myself a little
beside you."
"Poor bear," said the mother, "lie down by the fire, only take
care that you do not bum your coat." Then she cried, "Snow-white,
Rose-red, come out, the bear will do you no harm, he means well." So they both came out, and by-and-by the lamb and dove came
nearer, and were not afraid of him. The bear said, "Here, children,
knock the snow out of my coat a little"; so they brought the broom
and swept the bear's hide clean; and he stretched himself by the fire and growled contentedly and comfortably. It was not long before they grew quite at home, and played tricks with their clumsy
guest. They tugged his hair with their hands, put their feet upon
his back and rolled him about, or they took a hazel-switch and beat
him, and when he growled they laughed. But the bear took it all in
good part, only when they were too rough he called out, "Leave me aHve, children,
"Snowy-white, Rosy-red,
Will you beat your lover dead?"
When it was bed-time, and the others went to bed, the mother
said to the bear, "You can lie there by the hearth, and then you wiU
be safe from the cold and the bad weather." As soon as day dawned
Snow-White and Rose-Red 259
the two children let him out, and he trotted across the snow into
the forest.
Henceforth the bear came every evening at the same time, laid
himself down by the hearth, and let the children amuse themselves
with him as much as they liked; and they got so used to him that
the doors were never fastened until their black friend had arrived.
When spring had come and all outside was green, the bear said
one morning to Snow-white, "Now I must go away, and cannot
come back for the whole summer." "Where are you going, then,
dear bear?" asked Snow-white. *1 must go into the forest and guard my treasures from the wicked dwarfs. In the winter, when the earth
is frozen hard, they are obliged to stay below and caimot work
their way through; but now, when the sun has thawed and warmed
the earth, they break through it, and come out to pry and steal; and
what once gets into their hands, and in their caves, does not easily
see daylight again." Snow-white was quite sorry for his going away, and as she un- bolted the door for him, and the bear was hiurying out, he caught
against the bolt and a piece of his hairy coat was torn off, and it
seemed to Snow-white as if she had seen gold shining through it,
but she was not sure about it. The bear ran away quickly, and was
soon out of sight behind the trees.
A short time afterwards the mother sent her children into the forest to get fire-wood. There they foimd a big tree which lay felled on
the ground, and close by the trunk something was jumping back- wards and forwards in the grass, but they could not make out what
it was. When they came nearer they saw a dwarf with an old
withered face and a snow-white beard a yard long. The end of the
beard was caught in a crevice of the tree, and the httle fellow was
jvunping backwards and forwards hke a dog tied to a rope, and did not know what to do.
He glared at the girls with his fiery red eyes and cried, "Why do
you stand there? Can you not come here and help me?" "What are
you about there, Httle man?" asked Rose-red. "You stupid, prying
goose!" answered the dwarf; "I was going to split the tree to get a little wood for cooking. The littie bit of food that one of us wants
gets burnt up directly with thick logs; we do not swallow so much
as you coarse, greedy folk. I had just driven the wedge safely in,
and everything was going as I wished; but the wretched wood was
too smooth and suddenly sprang asunder, and the tree closed so
quickly that I could not pull out my beautiful white beard; so now
26o Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
it is tight in and I cannot get away, and the silly, sleek, milk-faced
things laughl Ugh I how odious you arel" The children tried very hard, but they could not pull the beard
out, it was caught too fast. "I will run and fetch some one," said
Rose-red. "You senseless goosel" snarled the dwarf; "why should you fetch some one? You are already two too many for me; can you
not think of something better?" "Don't be impatient," said Snowwhite, "I will help you," and she pulled her scissors out of her pocket, and cut off the end of the beard.
As soon as the dwarf felt himself free he laid hold of a bag which
lay amongst the roots of the tree, and which was full of gold, and
lifted it up, grumbling to himself, "Uncouth people, to cut off a
piece of my fine beard. Bad luck to you!" and then he swung the bag upon his back, and went off without even once looking at the children.
Some time after that Snow-white and Rose-red went to catch a
dish of fish. As they came near the brook they saw something like a
large grasshopper jumping towards the water, as if it were going to
leap in. They ran to it and found it was the dwarf. "Where are you
going?" said Rose-red; "you surely don't want to go into the
water?" "I am not such a fool!" cried the dwarf; "don't you see that
the accursed fish wants to pull me in?" The little man had been sit- ting there fishing, and unluckily the wind had twisted his beard
with the fishing-Hne; just then a big fish bit, and the feeble creature
had not strength to pull it out; the fish kept the upper hand and
pulled the dwarf towards him. He held on to all the reeds and
rushes, but it was of little good, he was forced to follow the movements of the fish, and was in urgent danger of being dragged into the water.
The girls came just in time; they held him fast and tried to free
his beard from the line, but all in vain, beard and line were entangled fast together. Nothing was left but to bring out the scissors
and cut the beard, whereby a small part of it was lost. When the
dwarf saw that he screamed out, "Is that civil, you toadstool, to
disfigure one's face? Was it not enough to clip off the end of my beard? Now you have cut off the best part of it. I cannot let myself
be seen by my people. I wish you had been made to run the soles
off your shoes!" Then he took out a sack of pearls which lay in the rushes, and without saying a word more he dragged it away and
disappeared behind a stone.
It happened that soon afterwards the mother sent the two children to the town to buy needles and thread, and laces and ribbons.
Snoio-White and Rose-Red 261
The road led them across a heath upon which huge pieces of rock
lay strewn here and there. Now they noticed a large bird hovering
in the air, flying slowly round and round above them; it sank lower
and lower, and at last settled near a rock not far off. Directly afterwards they heard a loud, piteous cry. They ran up and saw with
horror that the eagle had seized their old acquaintance the dwarf,
and was going to carry him off.
The children, full of pity, at once took tight hold of the little
man, and pulled against the eagle so long that at last he let his
booty go. As soon as the dwarf had recovered from his first fright
he cried with his shrill voice, "Could you not have done it more carefully! You dragged at my brown coat so that it is all torn and
full of holes, you helpless clumsy creatures I" Then he took up a sack full of precious stones, and slipped away again under the rock
into his hole. The girls, who by this time were used to his thanklessness, went on their way and did their business in the town.
As they crossed the heath again on their way home they surprised the dwarf, who had emptied out his bag of precious stones in
a clean spot, and had not thought that any one would come there
so late. The evening sim shone upon the brilliant stones; they glittered and sparkled with all colors so beautifully that the children
stood still and looked at them. 'Why do you stand gaping there?" cried the dwarf, and his ashen-gray face became copper-red with
rage. He was going on with his bad words when a loud growling
was heard, and a black bear came trotting towards them out of the
forest. The dwarf sprang up in a fright, but he could not get to his
cave, for the bear was akeady close. Then in the dread of his heart
he cried, "Dear Mr. Bear, spare me, I will give you all my treas- ures; look, the beautiful jewels lying therel Grant me my life; what
do you want with such a slender little fellow as I? you would not
feel me between your teeth. Come, take these two wicked girls,
they are tender morsels for you, fat as young quails; for mercy's
sake eat theml" The bear took no heed of his words, but gave the wicked creature a single blow with his paw, and he did not move
again.
The girls had run away, but the bear called to them, "Snow-white
and Rose-red, do not be afraid; wait, I vsdll come with you." Then they knew his voice and waited, and when he came up to them
suddenly his bearskin fell off, and he stood there a handsome man,
clothed all in gold. "I am a King's son," he said, "and I was be- witched by that wicked dwarf, who had stolen my treasures; I have
262 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
had to run about the forest as a savage bear until I was freed by his
death. Now he has got his well-deserved punishment." Snow-white was married to him, and Rose-red to his brother, and
they divided between them the great treasure which the dwarf had
gathered together in his cave. The old mother lived peacefully and
happily with her children for many years. She took the two rose
trees with her, and they stood before her window, and every year
bore the most beautiful roses, white and red.
The Poor Miller's Boy and the Cat
There once lived an old miller who had neither wife nor child, and
three apprentices served imder him. As they had been with him
several years, one day he said to them, "I am old, and want to sit in the chimney-comer; go out, and whichsoever of you brings me the best horse home, to him wdll I give the miU, and in return for it he
shall take care of me tiU my death." The third of the boys was, however, the drudge, who was looked on as fooUsh by the others;
they begrudged the mill to him, and afterwards he would not have
it. Then all three went out together, and when they came to the village, the two said to stupid Hans, "Thou mayst just as well stay
here; as long as thou livest thou wilt never get a horse." Hans, however, went with them, and when it was night they
came to a cave in which they lay ^own to sleep. The two sharp
ones waited imtil Hans had fallen asleep, then they got up, and
went away leaving him where he was. And they thought they had
done a very clever thing, but it was certain to turn out iU for them.
When the sun arose, and Hans woke up, he was lying in a deep
cavern. He looked around on every side and exclaimed, "Oh,
heavens, where am I?" Then he got up and clambered out of the
cave, went into the forest, and thought, "Here I am quite alone and
deserted, how shall I obtain a horse now?" While he was thus walking full of thought, he met a small tabbycat which said quite kindly, "Hans, where are you going?" "Alas,
you cannot help me." "I well know your desire," said the cat. "You wish to have a beautiful horse. Come with me, and be my faithful
servant for seven years long, and then I will give you one more
beautiful than any you have ever seen in your whole hfe." "Well,
The Poor Millers Boy and the Cat 263
this is a wonderful cat!" thought Hans, "but I am determined to see
if she is telling the truth." So she took him with her into her enchanted castle, where there
were nothing but cats who were her servants. They leapt nimbly
upstairs and downstairs, and were merry and happy. In the evening
when they sat down to dinner, three of them had to make music.
One played the bassoon, the other the fiddle, and the third put the
trumpet to his hps, and blew out his cheeks as much as he possibly
could. When they had dined, the table was carried away, and the
cat said, "Now, Hans, come and dance with me." "No," said he, "I
won't dance with a pussy-cat. I have never done that yet." "Then
take him to bed," said she to the cats. So one of them Hghted him to his bed-room, one pulled his shoes off, one his stockings, and at last one of them blew out the candle.
Next morning they retmrned and helped him out of bed, one put
his stockings on for him, one tied his garters, one brought his shoes,
one washed him, and one dried his face v^dth her tail. "That feels
very softl" said Hans. He, however, had to serve the cat, and chop some wood every day, and to do that he had an axe of silver, and
the wedge and saw were of silver and the mallet of copper. So he
chopped the wood small; stayed there in the house and had good
meat and drink, but never saw any one but the tabby-cat and her servants.
Once she said to him, "Go and mow my meadow, and dry the
grass," and gave him a scythe of silver, and a whetstone of gold, but bade him deliver them up again carefully. So Hans went
thither, and did what he was bidden, and when he had finished the
work, he carried the scythe, whetstone, and hay to the house, and
asked if it was not yet time for her to give him his reward. "No,"
said the cat, "you must first do something more for me of the same
kind. There is timber of silver, carpenter's axe, square, and every- thing that is needful, all of silver; with these build me a small
house." Then Hans built the small house, and said that he had now done everything, and still he had no horse. Nevertheless, the seven
years had gone by with him as if they were six months.
The cat asked him if he would like to see her horses? "Yes," said Hans. Then she opened the door of the small house, and when she
had opened it, there stood twelve horses— such horses, so bright and
shining, that his heart rejoiced at the sight of them. She gave him to
eat and to drink, and said, "Go home, I will not give you your
horse away with you; but in three days' time I will follow you and
bring it." So Hans set out, and she showed him the way to the mill.
264 Grimms Complete Fairy Tales
She had, however, never once given him a new coat, and he had
been obliged to keep on his dirty old smock-frock, which he had
brought with him, and which during the seven years had every- where become too small for him.
When he reached home, the two other apprentices were there
again as well, and each of them certainly had brought a horse with
him, but one of them was a blind one, and the other lame. They
asked Hans where his horse was. 'It will follow me in three days'
time." Then they laughed and said, 'Indeed, stupid Hans, where
wilt thou get a horse? It will be a fine one!" Hans went into the par- lor, but the miller said he should not sit down to table, for he was
so ragged and torn, that they would all be ashamed of him if any
one came in. So they gave him a mouthful of food outside, and at
night, when they went to rest, the two others would not let him
have a bed, and at last he was forced to creep into the goose-house,
and lie down on a little hard straw. In the morning when he awoke,
the three days had passed, and a coach came with six horses and
they shone so bright that it was delightful to see themi And a servant brought a seventh as well, which was for the poor miller s boy.
A magnificent Princess alighted from the coach and went into the
mill, and this princess was the little tabby-cat whom poor Hans had
served for seven years. She asked the miUer where the miUer's boy
and drudge was? Then the miller said, "We cannot have him here
in the miU, for he is so ragged; he is lying in the goose-house."
Then the King's daughter said that they were to bring him immedi- ately. So they brought him out, and he had to hold his little smockfrock together to cover himself. The servants unpacked splendid
garments, and washed him and dressed him, and when that was
done, no Eling could have looked more handsome. Then the maiden
desired to see the horses which the other apprentices had brought
home with them, and one of them was blind and the other lame.
So she ordered the servant to bring the seventh horse, and when
the miller saw it, he said that such a horse as that had never yet entered his yard. "And that is for the third miller's-boy," said she.
"Then he must have the mill," said the miller, but the King's daughter said that the horse was there, and that he was to keep his
mill as well, and took her faithful Hans and set him in the coach,
and drove away with him.
They first drove to the little house which he had built with the
silver tools, and behold it was a great castle, and everything inside
it was of silver and gold; and then she married him, and he was
The Old Woman in the Wood 265
rich, so rich that he had enough for all the rest of his life. After this,
let no one ever say that any one who is silly can never become a
person of importance.
The Old Woman in the Wood
A POOR servant-girl was once traveling with the family she served
through a great forest, and when they were in the midst of it, rob- bers came out of the thicket, and murdered all they found. All
perished together except the girl, who had jumped out of the carriage in a fright, and hidden herself behind a tree. When the robbers
had gone away with their booty, she came out and beheld the great
disaster. Then she began to weep bitterly, and said, "What can a poor girl like me do now? I do not know how to get out of the forest, no human being Hves in it, so I must certainly starve." She walked about and looked for a road, but could find none. When it
was evening she seated herself under a tree, gave herself into God's keeping, and resolved to sit waiting there and not go away, let
what might happen.
When, however, she had sat there for a while, a white dove came
flying to her with a Httle golden key in its mouth. It put the httle
key in her hand, and said, "Do you see that great tree, therein is a little lock, it opens with the tiny key; inside the tree you will find
food enough, and sufFer no more hunger." Then she went to the tree and opened it, and found milk in a little dish, and white bread
to break into it, so that she could eat her fill. When she was
satisfied, she said, "It is now the time when the hejns at home go to
roost; I am so tired I could go to bed too." Then the dove flew to her again, and brought another golden key in its biU, and said,
"Open that tree there, and you will find a bed." So she opened it, and found a beautiful white bed, and she prayed God to protect
her during the night, and lay down and slept. In the morning the
dove came for the third time, and again brought a little key, and
said, "Open that tree there, and you will find clothes." And when she opened it, she found garments beset with gold and with jewels,
more splendid than those of any King's daughter. So she lived there for some time, and the dove came every day and provided her wdth
aU she needed, and it was a quiet good fife.
266 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
Once, however, the dove came and said, "Will you do something
for my sake?" "With all my heart," said the girl. Then said the little
dove, "I will guide you to a small house; enter it, and inside it, an
old woman will be sitting by the fire and will say, 'Good-day.' But on your life give her no answer, let her do what she will, but pass
by her on the right side; further on, there is a door, open it, and
you will enter into a room where a quantity of rings of aU kinds are
lying, among which are some magnificent ones with shining stones.
Leave them, however, where they are, and seek out a plain one,
which must likewise be among them, and bring it here to me as
quickly as you can." The girl went to the little house, and came to the door. There sat
an old woman who stared when she saw her, and said, "Good-day,
my child." The girl gave her no answer, and opened the door.
"Whither away," cried the old woman, and seized her by the gown,
and wanted to hold her fast, saying, "That is my house; no one can
go in there if I choose not to allow it." But the girl was silent, got away from her, and went straight into the room.
On the table lay an enormous quantity of rings, which gleamed
and glittered before her eyes. She turned them over and looked for
the plain one, but could not find it. While she was seeking, she saw
the old woman and how she was stealing away, and wanting to get
off with a bird-cage which she had in her hand. So she went after
her and took the cage out of her hand, and when she raised it up
and looked into it, a bird was inside which had the plain ring in its
bill. Then she took the ring, and ran quite joyously home with it,
and thought the little white dove would come and get the ring, but it did not.
Then she leant against a tree and determined to wait for the
dove, and, as she thus stood, it seemed just as if the tree was soft
and phant, and was letting its branches down. And suddenly the
branches twined around her, and were two arms, and when she
looked round, the tree was a handsome man, who embraced and
kissed her heartily, and said, "You have delivered me from the power of the old woman, who is a wicked witch. She had changed
me into a tree, and every day for two hours I was a white dove, and
so long as she possessed the ring I could not regain my human
form." Then his servants and his horses, who had likewise been changed into trees, were freed from the enchantment also, and
stood beside him. And he led them forth to his kingdom, for he was
a King's son, and they married, and lived happily.
The Lambkin and the Little Fish
There were once a little brother and a little sister, who loved each
other with all their hearts. Their own mother was, however, dead,
and they had a step-mother, who was not kind to them, and secretly did everything she could to hurt them. It so happened that
the two were playing with other children in a meadow before the
house, and there was a pond in the meadow which came up to one
side of the house. The children ran about it, and caught each other,
and played at counting out.
"Eneke Beneke, let me live. And I to thee my bird will give.
The little bird, for straw shall seek.
The straw Til give to the cow to eat.
The pretty cow shall give me milk.
The milk I'll to the baker take. The baker he shall bake a cake.
The cake I'll give unto the cat. The cat shall catch some mice for that.
The mice I'll hang up in the smoke.
And then you'll see the snow."
They stood in a circle while they played this, and the one to
whom the word snow fell, had to run away and all the others ran
after him and caught him. As they were running about so merrily
the step-mother watched them from the vdndow, and grew angry. And as she understood arts of vwtchcraft she bev^atched them both,
and changed the Httle brother into a fish, and the little sister into a
lamb. Then the fish swam here and there about the pond and was
very sad, and the lambkin walked up and down the meadow, and
was miserable, and could not eat or touch one blade of grass.
Thus passed a long time, and then strangers came as visitors to
the castle. The false step-mother thought, "This is a good opportunity," and called the cook and said to him, "Go and fetch the lamb
from the meadow and kill it, we have nothing else for the visitors." Then the cook went away and got the lamb, and took it into the
kitchen and tied its feet, and all this it bore patiently. When he had
drawn out his knife and was whetting it on the door-step to kill the
268 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
lamb, he noticed a little fish swimming backwards and forwards in
the water in front of the kitchen-sink and looking up at him. This, however, was the brother, for when the fish saw the cook take the
lamb away, it followed them and swam along the pond to the
house; then the lamb cried down to it,
"Ah, brother, in the pond so deep. How sad is my poor hearti
Even now the cook he whets his knife
To take away my tender life."
The little fish answered,
"Ah, little sister, up on high. How sad is my poor heart
While in this pond I lie."
When the cook heard that the lambkin could speak and said such
sad words to the fish down below, he was terrified and thought this
could be no common lamb, but must be bewitched by the wicked
woman in the house. Then said he, "Be easy, I will not Idll thee," and took another sheep and made it ready for the guests, and conveyed the lambkin to a good peasant woman, to whom he related all that he had seen and heard.
The peasant was, however, the very woman who had been foster- mother to the little sister, and she suspected at once who the lamb
was, and went with it to a wise woman. Then the wise woman pronoimced a blessing over the lambkin and the little fish, by means of
which they regained their human forms, and after this she took
them both into a Httle hut in a great forest, where they lived alone,
but were contented and happy.
The Juniper Tree
A LONG, long time ago, perhaps as much as two thousand years,
there was a rich man, and he had a beautiful and pious wife, and
they loved each other very much, and they had no children, though
they wished greatly for some, and the wife prayed for one day and
night. Now, in the courtyard in front of their house stood a juniper
tree; and one day in winter the wife was standing beneath it, and
The Juniper Tree 269
paring an apple, and as she pared it she cut her finger, and the
blood fell upon the snow.
"Ah," said the woman, sighing deeply, and looking down at the
blood, "if only I could have a child as red as blood, and as white as
snowl" And as she said these words, her heart suddenly grew light, and she felt siure she should have her wish. So she went back to the
house, and when a month had passed the snow was gone; in two
months everything was green; in three months the flowers sprang
out of the earth; in four months the trees were in full leaf, and the
branches were thickly entwined; the Httle birds began to sing, so
that the woods echoed, and the blossoms fell from the trees; when
the fifth month had passed the wife stood imder the juniper tree,
and it smelt so sweet that her heart leaped within her, and she fell
on her knees for joy; and when the sixth month had gone, the fruit
was thick and fine, and she remained still; and the seventh month
she gathered the berries and ate them eagerly, and was sick and
sorrowful; and when the eighth month had passed she called to her
husband, and said, weeping, 'If I die, bury me under the juniper
tree." Then she was comforted and happy until the ninth month had
passed, and then she bore a child as white as snow and as red as
blood, and when she saw it her joy was so great that she died.
Her husband buried her under the juniper tree, and he wept
sore; time passed, and he became less sad; and after he had grieved
a little more he left ofiF, and then he took another wife.
His second wife bore him a daughter, and his first wife's child was a son, as red as blood and as white as snow. Whenever the wife
looked at her daughter she felt great love for her, but whenever she
looked at the Httle boy, evil thoughts came into her heart, of how
she could get all her husband's money for her daughter, and how the boy stood in the way; and so she took great hatred to him, and
drove him from one comer to another, and gave him a buffet here
and cuff there, so that the poor child was always in disgrace; when
he came back after school hours there was no peace for him.
Once, when the wife went into the room upstairs, her little
daughter followed her, and said, "Mother, give me an apple."
"Yes, my child," said the mother, and gave her a fine apple out of the chest, and the chest had a great heavy lid with a strong iron lock.
"Mother," said the little girl, "shall not my brother have one
too?"
270 Gnmni's Complete Fairy Tales
That was what the mother expected; and she said, "Yes, when he comes back from school." And when she saw from the window that he was coming, an evil
thought crossed her mind, and she snatched the apple, and took it
from her little daughter, saying, "You shall not have it before your
brother." Then she threw the apple into the chest, and shut the Hd. Then
the little boy came in at the door, and she said to him in a kind
tone, but with evil looks, "My son, vvdll you have an apple?"
"Mother," said the boy, "how terrible you lookl Yes, give me an
apple 1" Then she spoke as Idndly as before, holding up the cover of the
chest, "Come here and take out one for yourself." And as the boy was stooping over the open chest, crash went the
lid down, so that his head flew off among the red apples. But then
the woman felt great terror, and wondered how she could escape the blame. And she went to the chest of drawers in her bedroom
and took a white handkerchief out of the nearest drawer, and
fitting the head to the neck, she bound them with a handkerchief,
so that nothing should be seen, and set him on a chair before the
door with the apple ia his hand.
Then came little Marjory into the kitchen to her mother, who was
standing before the fire stirring a pot of hot water.
"Mother," said Marjory, "my brother is sitting before the door and he has an apple in his hand, and looks very pale; I asked him
to give me the apple, but he did not answer me; it seems very
strange." "Go again to him," said the mother, "and if he will not
answer you, give him a box on the ear."
So Marjory went again and said, "Brother, give me the apple." But as he took no notice, she gave him a box on the ear, and his
head fell off^, at which she was greatly terrified, and began to cry
and scream, and ran to her mother, and said, "Oh motherl I have
knocked my brothers head offl" and cried and screamed, and would not cease.
"Oh Marjoryl" said her mother, "what have you done? But keep
quiet, that no one may see there is anything the matter; it can't be
helped now; we will put him out of the way safely." When the father came home and sat down to table, he said,
"Where is my son?" But the mother was filling a great dish full of black broth, and Marjory was crying bitterly, for she could not refrain. Then the father said again, "Where is my son?" "Oh," said
the mother, "he is gone into the coimtry to his great-imcle's to stay
The Juniper Tree 271
for a little while." "What should he go for?" said the father, "and
without bidding me good-bye, tool" "Oh, he wanted to go so much, and he asked me to let him stay there six weeks; he will be well
taken care of." 'TDear me," said the father, "1 am quite sad about it;
it was not right of him to go without bidding me good-bye."
With that he began to eat, saying, "Marjory, what are you crying for? Your brother will come back some time."
After a while he said, "Well, wife, the food is very good; give me
some more." And the more he ate the more he wanted, until he had eaten it
all up, and he threw the bones under the table. Then Marjory went
to her chest of drawers, and took one of her best handkerchiefs
from the bottom drawer, and picked up all the bones from under
the table and tied them up in her handkerchief, and went out at the
door crying bitterly. She laid them in the green grass under the
juniper tree, and immediately her heart grew light again, and she
wept no more.
Then the juniper tree began to wave to and fro, and the boughs
drew together and then parted, just like a clapping of hands for
joy; then a cloud rose from the tree, and in the midst of the cloud
there burned a fire, and out of the fire a beautiful bird arose, and,
singing most sweetly, soared high into the air; and when he had
flown away, the juniper tree remained as it was before, but the
handkerchief full of bones was gone. Marjory felt quite glad and
light-hearted, just as if her brother were still alive. So she went
back merrily into the house and had her dinner.
The bird, when it flew away, perched on the roof of a goldsmith's house, and began to sing,
"It uxis my mother who murdered me; It was my father who ate of me;
It was my sister Marjory
Who all my bones in pieces found;
Them in a handkerchief she hound.
And laid them under the juniper tree.
Kywitt, kywitt, kywitt, I cry.
Oh what a beautiful bird am IF'
The goldsmith was sitting in his shop making a golden chain, and
when he heard the bird, who was sitting on his roof and singing, hQ
started up to go and look, and as he passed over his threshold he
lost one of his slippers; and he went into the middle of the street
with a slipper on one foot and only a sock on the other; with his
272 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
apron on, and the gold chain in one hand and the pincers in the
other; and so he stood in the sunshine looking up at the bird.
"Bird," said he, "how beautifully you sing; do sing that piece
over again." "No," said the bird, "I do not sing for nothing twice; if
you will give me that gold chain I will sing again." "Very well,"
said the goldsmith, "here is the gold chain; now do as you said." Down came the bird and took the gold chain in his right claw,
perched in front of the goldsmith, and sang,
"It was my mother who murdered me; It was my father who ate of me;
It was my sister Marjory
Who all my hones in pieces found;
Them in a handkerchief she hound.
And laid them under the juniper tree.
Kywitt, kywitt, kywitt, I cry.
Oh what a beautiful bird am II"
Then the bird flew to a shoemaker's, and perched on his roof, and sang,
"It was my mother who murdered me; It was my father who ate of me;
It was my sister Marjory
Who all my bones in pieces found;
Them in a handkerchief she bound.
And laid them under the juniper tree.
Kywitt, kywitt, kywitt, I cry,
Oh what a beautiful bird am IF'
When the shoemaker heard, he ran out of his door in his shirt
sleeves and looked up at the roof of his house, holding his hand to
shade his eyes from the sun. "Bird," said he, 'Tiow beautifully you
sing!" Then he called in at his door, "Wife, come out directly; here
is a bird singing beautifully. Just Hsten." Then he called his daughter, all his children, and acquaintance,
both young men and maidens, and they came up the street and
gazed on the bird, and saw how beautiful it was with red and
green feathers, and round its throat was as it were gold, and its
eyes twinkled in its head Hke stars.
"Bird," said the shoemaker, "do sing that piece over again."
"No," said the bird, "I may not sing for nothing twice; you must
give me something." "Wife," said the man, "go into the shop; on
the top shelf stands a pair of red shoes; bring them here." .So the
The Juniper Tree 273
wife went and brought the shoes. "Now bird," said the man, "sing
us that piece again." And the bird came down and took the shoes in his left claw, and
flew up again to the roof, and sang,
"It was my mother who murdered me; It was my father who ate of me;
It uoas my sister Marjory
Who all my hones in pieces found;
Them in a handkerchief she hound.
And laid them under the juniper tree.
Kywitt, kywitt, kywitt, I cry.
Oh what a beautiful bird am I!"
And when he had finished he flew away, with the chain in his
right claw and the shoes in his left claw, and he flew till he reached
a miU, and the mill went "cKp-clap, clip-clap, clip-clap." And in the
mill sat twenty miller's-men hewing a millstone— 'luck-hack, hickhack, hick-hack," while the mill was going "clip-clap, cHp-clap,
chp-clap." And the bird perched on a Unden tree that stood in front of the mill, and sang,
"It was my mother who murdered me";
Here one of the men looked up.
"It was my father who ate of me";
Then two more looked up and listened.
"It vxis my sister Marjory"
Here four more looked up.
"Who all my bones in pieces found;
Them in a handkerchief she bound,"
Now there were only eight left hewing.
"And laid them under the juniper tree."
Now only five.
"Kywitt, kywitt, kywitt, I cry,"
Now only one.
"Oh what a beautiful bird am IF'
At length the last one left off, and he only heard the end.
"Bird," said he, "how beautifully you sing; let me hear it all. Sing
274 GHmm's Complete Fairy Tales
that againl" "No," said the bird, "I may not sing it twice for nothing; if you will give me the millstone I will sing it again." "Indeed,"
said the man, "if it belonged to me alone you should have it." "All
right," said the others, "if he sings again he shall have it." Then the bird came down, and all the twenty millers heaved up
the stone with poles— "yo! heave-hol yol heave-hol" and the bird stuck his head through the hole in the middle, and with the millstone round his neck he flew up to the tree and sang,
"It was my mother who murdered me; It was my father who ate of me;
It was my sister Marjory
Who all my hones in pieces found;
Them in a handkerchief she hound.
And laid them under the juniper tree.
KyuMt, kywitt, kywitt, I cry.
Oh what a beautiful hird am 11"
And when he had finished, he spread his wings, having in the
right claw the chain, and in the left claw the shoes, and round his
neck the millstone, and he flew away to his father's house. In the parlor sat the father, the mother, and Marjory at the table;
the father said, "How light-hearted and cheerful I feel." "Nay," said
the mother, "I feel very low, just as if a great storm were coming." But Marjory sat weeping; and the bird came flying, and perched on the roof.
"Oh," said the father, "I feel so joyful, and the sun is shining so
bright; it is as if I were going to meet with an old friend." "Nay,"
said the wife, "1 am terrified, my teeth chatter, and there is fire in
my veins," and she tore open her dress to get air; and Marjory sat in a comer and wept, with her plate before her, until it was quite full
of tears. Then the bird perched on the juniper tree, and sang,
"It was my mother who murdered me";
And the mother stopped her ears and hid her eyes, and would
neither see nor hear; nevertheless, the noise of a fearful storm was
in her ears, and in her eyes a quivering and burning as of lightning.
"It was my father who ate of me";
"Oh, motherl" said the father, "there is a beautiful bird singing so finely, and the sun shines, and everything smells as sweet as cinnamon."
"It was my sister Marjory"
The Juniper Tree 275
Marjory hid her face in her lap and wept, and the father said, "I
must go out to see the bird." "Oh do not gol" said the wife, "I feel as if the house were on fire." But the man went out and looked at the bird.
"Who all my bones in pieces found; Them in a handkerchief she bound.
And laid them under the juniper tree.
Kywitt, kywitt, kywitt, I cry.
Oh what a beautiful bird am I!"
With that the bird let fall the gold chain upon his father's neck,
and it fitted him exactly. So he went indoors and said, "Look what
a beautiful chain the bird has given me!" Then his wife was so terrified that she fell down on the floor, and
her cap came off. Then the bird began again to sing,
"It vxis my mother who murdered me";
"Oh," groaned the mother, "that I were a thousand fathoms
under ground, so as not to be obliged to hear it."
"It was my father who ate of me";
Then the woman lay as if she were dead.
"It was my sister Marjory"
"Oh," said Marjory, "I will go out, too, and see if the bird will
give me anything." And so she went.
"Who all my bones in pieces found;
Them in a handkerchief she bound,"
Then he threw the shoes down to her.
"And laid them under the juniper tree. Kywitt, kywitt, kywitt, I cry.
Oh what a beautiful bird am I!"
And poor Marjory all at once felt happy and joyful, and put on
her red shoes, and danced and jumped for joy. "Oh dear," said she,
"I felt so sad before I went outside, and now my heart is so Hghtl
He is a charming bird to have given me a pair of red shoes."
But the mother's hair stood on end, and looked like flame, and
she said, "Even if the world is coming to an end, I must go out for
a little relief." Just as she came outside the door, crash went the millstone on
her head, and crushed her flat. The father and daughter rushed out,
276 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
and saw smoke and flames of fire rise up; but when tliat had gone
by, there stood the Kttle brother; and he took his father and Marjory by the hand, and they felt very happy and content, and went
indoors, and sat at the table, and had their dinner.
Jorinda and Joringel
Theee once was an old castle in the midst of a large and thick forest, and in it an old woman who was a witch dwelt all alone. In the
daytime she changed herself into a cat or a screech-owl, but in the
evening she took her proper shape again as a human being. She
could lure wild beasts and birds to her, and then she killed and
boiled and roasted them. If any one came within one himdred
paces of the castle he was obliged to stand still, and could not stir
from the place until she bade him be free. But whenever an innocent maiden came within this circle, she changed her into a bird,
and shut her up in a wicker-work cage, and carried the cage into a
room in the castle. She had about seven thousand cages of rare birds in the castle.
Now there was a maiden who was called Jorinda, fairer than all
other girls. She and a handsome youth named Joringel had promised to marry each other. They were stiU in the days of betrothal,
and their greatest happiness was being together. One day in order
that they might be able to talk together in quiet they went for a
walk in the forest. 'Take care," said Joringel, "that you do not go
too near the castle." It was a beautiful evening; the sun shone brightly between the
trunks of the trees into the dark green of the forest, and the turtledoves sang mournfully upon the young boughs of the birch trees.
Jorinda wept now and then. She sat down in the sunshine and
was sorrowful. Joringel was sorrowful too; they were as sad as if
they were about to die. Then they looked around them, and were
quite at a loss, for they did not know by which way they should go
home. The sun was stiU half above the rpountain and half set.
Joringel looked through the bushes, and saw the old walls of the
castle close at hand. He was horror-stricken and filled with deadly
fear. Jorinda was singing.
Jorinda and Joringel nyy
"My little bird, with the necklace red. Sings sorrow, sorrow, sorrow,
He sings that the dove must soon be dead.
Sings sorrow, sor—jug, jug, jug."
Joringel looked for Jorinda. She was changed into a nightingale,
and sang "jug, jug, jug." A screech-owl with glowing eyes flew
three times round about her, and three times cried "to-whoo, towhoo, to-whool" Joringel could not move: he stood there Hke a stone, and could
neither weep nor speak, nor move hand or foot.
The sun had now set. The owl flew into the thicket, and directly
afterwards there came out of it a crooked old woman, yellow and
lean, with large red eyes and a hooked nose, the point of which
reached to her chin. She muttered to herself, caught the nightingale, and took it away in her hand.
Joringel could neither speak nor move from the spot; the nightingale was gone. At last the woman came back, and said in a hollow
voice, "Greet thee, Zachiel. If the moon shines on the cage, Zachiel,
let him loose at once." Then Joringel was freed. He fell on his knees before the woman and begged that she would give him back his
Jorinda, but she said that he shoidd never have her again, and went
away. He called, he wept, he lamented, but all in vain, "Ah, what is to become of me?"
Joringel went away, and at last came to a strange village; there
he kept sheep for a long time. He often walked roimd and round
the castle, but not too near to it. At last he dreamt one night that he
found a blood-red flower, in the middle of which was a beautiful
large pearl; that he picked the flower and went with it to the castle,
and that everything he touched with the flower was freed from enchantment; he also dreamt that by means of it he recovered his
Jorinda.
In the morning, when he awoke, he began to seek over hill and
dale if he could find such a flower. He sought until the ninth day,
and then, early in the morning, he found the blood-red flower. In
the middle of it there was a large dew-drop, as big as the finest
pearl.
Day and night he journeyed with this flower to the castle. When
he was within a hundred paces of it he was not held fast, but
walked on to the door. Joringel was full of joy; he touched the door
with the flower, and it sprang open. He walked in through the
courtyard, and listened for the sound of the birds. At last he heard
278 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
it. He went on and found the room from whence it came, and there
the witch was feeding the birds in the seven thousand cages.
When she saw Joringel she was angry, very angry, and scolded
and spat poison and gall at him, but she could not come within two
paces of him. He did not take any notice of her, but went and
looked at the cages with the birds, but there were many hundred
nightingales; how was he to find his Jorinda again?
Just then he saw the old woman quietly take away a cage with a
bird in it, and go towards the door.
Swiftly he sprang towards her, touched the cage with the flower,
and also the old woman. She could now no longer bewitch any one;
and Jorinda was standing there, clasping him round the neck, and she was as beautiful as ever!
The Goose-Girl at the Well
There was once upon a time a very old woman, who Hved with her
flock of geese in a waste place among the mountains, and there had
a httle house. The waste was surrounded by a large forest, and
every morning the old woman took her crutch and hobbled into it.
There, however, the dame was quite active, more so than any one
would have thought, considering her age, and collected grass for
her geese, picked all the wild fruit she could reach, and carried everything home on her back. Any one would have thought that the
heavy load would have weighed her to the groimd, but she always
brought it safely home. If any one met her, she greeted him quite
courteously. "Good day, dear countryman, it is a fine day. Ah! you wonder that I should drag grass about, but every one must take his
burden on his back." Nevertheless, people did not like to meet her if they could help it, and took by preference a roundabout way,
and when a father with his boys passed her, he whispered to them,
"Beware of the old woman. She has claws beneath her gloves; she
is a witch." One morning a handsome young man was going through the
forest. The sun shone bright, the birds sang, a cool breeze crept
through the leaves, and he was full of joy and gladness. He had as
yet met no one, when he suddenly perceived the old witch kneeling
on the ground cutting grass with a sickle. She had already thrust a
The Goose-Girl at the Well 279
whole load into her cloth, and near it stood two baskets, which
were filled with wild apples and pears. "But, good little mother,"
said he, 'liow can you carry all that away?" "1 must carry it, dear
sir," answered she, "rich folk's children have no need to do such
things, but with the peasant folk the saying goes, 'Don't look behind you, you will only see how crooked your back isl'"
"Will you help me?" she said, as he remained standing by her.
"You have still a straight back and young legs, it would be a trifle to you. Besides, my house is not so very far from here, it stands there
on the heath behind the hill. How soon you would bound up
thither!" The young man took compassion on the old woman. "My
father is certainly no peasant," replied he, "but a rich count; never- theless, that you may see that it is not only peasants who can carry
things, I will take yoiu: bundle." "If you will try it," said she, "I shall be very glad. You will certainly have to walk for an hour, but
what will that signify to you; only you must carry the apples and
pears as well." It now seemed to the young man just a little serious, when he
heard of an hour's walk, but the old woman would not let him ofiF, packed the bundle on his back; and himg the two baskets on his
arm. "See, it is quite light," said she. "No, it is not Hght," answered
the count, and pulled a rueful face. "Verily, the bimdle weighs as heavily as if it were full of cobblestones, and the apples and pears
are as heavy as lead! I can scarcely breathe." He had a mind to put everything down again, but the old woman would not allow it.
"Just look," said she mockingly, "the young gentleman will not carry what I, an old woman, have so often dragged along. You are
ready with fine words, but when it comes to be earnest, you want to
take to your heels. Why are you standing loitering there?" she continued. "Step out. No one will take the bundle ofiE again." As long as he walked on level ground, it was still bearable, but
when they came to the hill and had to climb, and the stones roUed
down under his feet as if they were ahve, it was beyond his
strength. The drops of perspiration stood on his forehead, and ran,
hot and cold, down his back. "Dame," said he, "I can go no farther.
I want to rest a little." "Not here," answered the old woman, "when
we have arrived at our joiu*ney's end, you can rest; but now you
must go forward. Who knows what good it may do you?" "Old
woman, you are becoming shameless!" said the count, and tried to throw off the bundle, but he labored in vain; it stuck as fast to his
back as if it grew there. He turned and twisted, but he could not
get rid of it. The old woman laughed at this, and sprang about
28o Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
quite delighted on her crutch. "Don't get angry, dear sir," said she,
"you are growing as red in the face as a turkey-cockl Carry your bundle patiently. I will give you a good present when we get
home." What could he do? He was obliged to submit to his fate, and
crawl along patiently behind the old woman. She seemed to grow
more and more nimble, and his burden still heavier. All at once she
made a spring, jumped on to the bundle and seated herself on the
top of it; and however withered she might be, she was yet heavier
than the stoutest country lass. The youth's knees trembled, but when he did not go on, the old woman hit him about the legs
with a switch and with stinging-nettles. Groaning continually, he
climbed the mountain, and at length reached the old woman's house, when he was just about to drop. When the geese perceived
the old woman, they flapped their wings, stretched out their necks,
ran to meet her, cackling all the while. Behind the flock walked,
stick in hand, an old wench, strong and big, but ugly as night.
"Good mother," said she to the old woman, "has anything happened to you, you have stayed away so long?" "By no means, my
dear daughter," answered she, "I have met with nothing bad. On the contrary, only with this kind gentleman, who has carried my
burden for me; only think, he even took me on his back when I was
tired. The way, too, has not seemed long to us; we have been
merry, and have been cracking jokes with each other all the time." At last the old woman slid down, took the bundle off the young
man's back, and the baskets from his arm, looked at him quite
kindly, and said, "Now seat yourself on the bench before the door, and rest. You have fairly earned your wages, and they shall not be
wanting." Then she said to the goose-girl, "Go into the house, my dear daughter, it is not becoming for you to be alone with a young
gentleman; one must not pour oil on to the fire, he might fall in
love with you." The count knew not whether to laugh or to cry.
"Such a sweetheart as that," thought he, "could not touch my
heart, even if she were thirty years younger." In the meantime the old woman stroked and fondled her geese as
if they were children, and then went into the house with her
daughter. The youth lay down on the bench, under a wild apple
tree. The air was warm and mild; on all sides stretched a green
meadow, which was set with cowslips, wild thyme, and a thousand
other flowers; through the midst of it rippled a clear brook on
which the sun sparkled, and the white geese went walking backwards and forwards, or paddled in the water. "It is quite delightful
The Goose-Girl at the Well 281
here," said he, "but I am so tired that I cannot keep my eyes open; I will sleep a little. If only a gust of wind does not come and blow
my legs off my body, for they are as rotten as tinder." When he had slept a little while, the old woman came and shook
him tiU he awoke. "Sit up," said she, "you cannot stay here; I have certainly treated you hardly, still it has not cost you your life. Of
money and land you have no need; here is something else for you." Thereupon she thrust a little book into his hand, which was cut out
of a single emerald. "Take great care of it," said she, "it will bring
you good fortune." The count sprang up, and as he felt that he was quite fresh, and had recovered his vigor, he thanked the old woman
for her present, and set off without even once looking back at the
"beautfful" daughter. When he was already some way off, he stiU heard in the distance the noisy cry of the geese.
For three days the count had to wander in the wilderness before
he could find his way out. He then reached a large town, and as no
one knew him, he was led into the royal palace, where the King
and Queen were sitting on their throne. The coimt fell on one knee,
drew the emerald book out of his pocket, and laid it at the Queen's feet. She bade him rise and hand her the little book. Hardly, however, had she opened it, and looked therein, than she fell as if dead
to the ground. The count was seized by the King's servants, and was being led to prison, when the Queen opened her eyes, and or- dered them to release him, and every one was to go out, as she
wished to speak with him in private.
When the Queen was alone, she began to weep bitterly, and said,
"Of what use to me are the splendors and honors with which I am surrounded; every morning I awake in pain and sorrow. I had three
daughters, the youngest of whom was so beautiful that the whole world looked on her as a wonder. She was as white as snow, as rosy
as apple-blossom, and her hair as radiant as sunbeams. When she
cried, not tears fell from her eyes, put pearls and jewels only. When
she was fifteen years old, the King summoned all three sisters to
come before his throne. You should have seen how all the people
gazed when the youngest entered, it was just as if the sim were
rising!
"Then the King spoke, 'My daughters, I know not when my last day may arrive; I will today decide what each shall receive at my
death. You all love me, but the one of you who loves me best, shall
fare the best.' Each of them said she loved him best. 'Can you not
express to me,' said the King, 'how much you do love me, and thus
I shall see what you mean?' The eldest spoke. 1 love my father as
282 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
dearly as the sweetest sugar.' The second, 1 love my father as
dearly as my prettiest dress.' But the youngest was silent. Then her
father said, 'And you, my dearest child, how much do you love me?*
1 do not know, and can compare my love with nothing.' But her fa- ther insisted that she should name something. So she said at last,
'The best food does not please me without salt, therefore I love my father like salt.'
"When the King heard that, he fell into a passion, and said, Tf
you love me Hke salt, your love shall also be repaid you with salt.' Then he divided the kingdom between the two elder, but caused a
sack of salt to be bound on the back of the youngest, and two servants had to lead her forth into the wild forest. We all begged and
prayed for her," said the Queen, "but the King's anger was not to be appeased. How she cried when she had to leave usl The whole
road was strewn with the pearls which flowed from her eyes. The
King soon afterwards repented of his great severity, and had the
whole forest searched for the poor child, but no one could find her.
When I think that the wild beasts have devoured her, I know not
how to contain myself for sorrow; many a time I console myself
with the hope that she is still alive, and may have hidden herself in
a cave, or has found shelter with compassionate people. But picture
to yourself, when I opened your Httle emerald book, a pearl lay
therein, of exactly the same kind as those which used to fall from
my daughter s eyes; and then you can also imagine how the sight of
it stirred my heart. You must tell me how you came by that pearl." The count told her that he had received it from the old woman in
the forest, who had appeared very strange to him, and must be a
witch, but he had neither seen nor heard anything of the Queen's child. The King and Queen resolved to seek out the old woman.
They thought that there where the pearl had been, they would obtain news of their daughter.
The old woman was sitting in that lonely place at her spinningwheel, spinning. It was aheady dusk, and a log which was burning
on the hearth gave a scanty light. All at once there was a noise outside, the geese were coming home from the pasture, and uttering
their hoarse cries. Soon afterwards the daughter also entered. But
the old woman scarcely thanked her, and only shook her head a little. The daughter sat down beside her, took her spinning-wheel, and twisted the threads as nimbly as a young girl. Thus they both
sat for two hours, and exchanged never a word. At last something
rustled at the window, and two fiery eyes peered in. It was an old
night-owl, which cried, "Uhul" three times. The old woman looked
The Goose-Girl at the Well 283
up just a little, then she said, "Now, my little daughter, it is time
for you to go out and do your work." She rose and went out, and where did she go?— over the meadows into the valley. At last she
came to a well, with three old oak trees standing beside it; meanwhile the moon had risen large and round over the mountain, and
it was so light that one could have found a needle. She removed a
sldn which covered her face, then bent down to the well, and began
to wash herself. When she had finished, she dipped the sldn also in
the water, and then laid it on the meadow, so that it should bleach
in the moonlight, and dry again. But how the maiden was changedl
Such a change as that was never seen before! When the gray mask
fell off, her golden hair broke forth like simbeams, and spread
about like a mantle over her whole form. Her eyes shone out as
brightly as the stars in heaven, and her cheeks bloomed a soft red
like apple-blossom. But the fair maiden was sad. She sat down and wept bitterly.
One tear after another forced itself out of her eyes, and rolled
through her long hair to the ground. There she sat, and would have
remained sitting a long time, if there had not been a rustling and
cracking in the boughs of the neighboring tree. She sprang up like
a roe which had been overtaken by the shot of the hunter. Just then
the moon was obsciured by a dark cloud, and in an instant the
maiden had slipped on the old skin and vanished, Uke a Hght blown
out by the wind.
She ran back home, trembling Hke an aspen-leaf. The old woman
was standing on the threshold, and the girl was about to relate
what had befallen her, but the old woman laughed kindly, and
said, "I already know all." She led her into the room and Kghted a new log. She did not, however, sit down to her spinning again, but
fetched a broom and began to sweep and scour. "All must be clean
and sweet," she said to the girl. "But, mother," said the maiden,
"why do you begin work at so late an hour? What do you expect?"
"Do you know what time it is?" asked the old woman. "Not yet
midnight," answered the maiden, "but already past eleven o'clock."
"Do you not remember," continued the old woman, "that it is three years today since you came to me? Your time is up, we can no
longer remain together." The girl was terrified, and said, "Alas! dear mother, will you cast me off? Where shall I go? I have no
friends, and no home to which I can go. I have always done as you
bade me, and you have always been satisfied with me; do not send
me away." The old woman would not teU the maiden what lay before her.
284 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
"My stay here is over," she said to her, 'Taut when I depart, house and parlor must be clean; therefore do not hinder me in my work.
Have no care for yourself; you shall find a roof to shelter you, and
the wages which I will give shall also content you." "But tell me
what is about to happen," the maiden continued to entreat. "I tell you again, do not hinder me in my work. Do not say a word more,
go to yoiu: chamber, take the skin off your face, and put on the
silken gown which you had on when you came to me, and then
wait in yoiu- chamber imtil I caU you." But I must once more tell of the King and Queen, who had journeyed forth with the count in order to seek out the old woman in
the wilderness. The count had strayed away from them in the wood
by night, and had to walk onwards alone. Next day it seemed to
him that he was on the right track. He still went forward, until
darkness came on, then he chmbed a tree, intending to pass the
night there, for he feared that he might lose his way. When the
moon illumined the surrounding country he perceived a figure coming down the mountain. She had no stick in her hand, but yet he
could see that it was the goose-girl, whom he had seen before in
the house of the old woman. "Oho," cried he, "there she comes, and if I once get hold of one of the witches, the other shall not escape me!" But how astonished he was, when she went to the well, took off the sldn and washed herself, when her golden hair fell
down all about her, and she was more beautiful than any one
whom he had ever seen in the whole world. He hardly dared to
breathe, but stretched his head as far forward through the leaves as
he dared, and stared at her. Either he bent over too far, or whatever the cause might be, the bough suddenly cracked, and that very
moment the maiden slipped into the skin, sprang away Hke a roe,
and as the moon was suddenly covered, disappeared from his eyes.
Hardly had she disappeared, before the count descended from
the tree, and hastened after her with nimble steps. He had not been
gone long before he saw, in the twilight, two figures coming over
the meadow. It was the King and Queen, who had perceived from
a distance the light shining in the old woman's little house, and were going to it. The count told them what wonderful things he
had seen by the well, and they did not doubt that it had been their
lost daughter. They walked onwards full of joy, and soon came to
the httle house. The geese were sitting all round it, and had thrust
their heads under their wings and were sleeping, and not one of
them moved. The King and Queen looked in at the window, the old
woman was sitting there quietly spirming, nodding her head and
The Goose-Girl at the Well 285
never looldng round. The room was perfectly clean, as if the little
mist men, who carry no dust on their feet, lived there. Their daughter, however, they did not see. They gazed at all this for a long
time; at last they took heart, and knocked softly at the window.
The old woman appeared to have been expecting them; she rose,
and called out quite kindly, "Come in— I know you aheady." When
they had entered the room, the old woman said, "You might have spared yourself the long walk, if you had not three years ago
unjustly driven away your child, who is so good and lovable. No
harm has come to her; for three years she has had to tend the
geese; with them she has learnt no evil, but has preserved her purity of heart. You, however, have been suflBciently punished by the
misery in which you have hved." Then she went to the chamber
and called, "Come out, my little daughter." Thereupon the door opened, and the Princess stepped out in her silken garments, with
her golden hair and her shining eyes, and it was as if an angel from heaven had entered.
She went up to her father and mother, fell on their necks and
kissed them; there was no help for it, they all had to weep for joy.
The young count stood near them, and when she perceived him she
became as red in the face as a moss-rose, she herself did not know
why.
The King said, "My dear child, I have given away my kingdom.
What shall I give you?" "She needs nothing," said the old woman.
'T give her the tears that she has wept on your accoimt; they are precious pearls, finer than those that are found in the sea, and
worth more than your whole kingdom, and I give her my little
house as payment for her services." When the old woman had said that, she disappeared from their sight. The walls rattled a Httle, and
when the King and Queen looked round, the little house had
changed into a splendid palace, a royal table had been spread, and
the servants were running hither and thither.
The story goes still further, but my grandmother, who related it
to me, had partly lost her memory, and had forgotten the rest. I
shall always believe that the beautiful Princess married the count,
and that they remained together in the palace, and lived there in all
happiness so long as God willed it. Whether the snow-white geese,
which were kept near the little hut, were verily young maidens (no
one need take offense) whom the old woman had taken under her
protection, and whether they now received their human forms again,
and stayed as handmaids to the young Queen, I do not exactly
know, but I suspect it. This much is certain, that the old woman
286 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
was no witch, as people thought, but a wise woman, who meant
well. Very likely it was she who, at the Princess's birth, gave hef the gift of weeping pearls instead of tears. That does not happen
nowadays, or else the poor would soon become rich.
The Three Little Men in the Wood
There was once a man, whose wife was dead, and a woman, whose
husband was dead; the man had a daughter, and so had the
woman. The girls were well acquainted with each other, and used
to play together in the woman's house. One day the woman said to
the man's daughter,
"Listen to me, teU your father that I will marry him, and then you shall have miUc to wash in every morning and wine to drink,
and my daughter shall have water to wash in and water to drink." The girl went home and told her father what the woman had
said. The man said, ''What shall I do! Marriage is a joy, and also a
torment." At last, as he could come to no conclusion, he took o£E his boot,
and said to his daughter, "Take this boot, it has a hole in the sole; go up with it into the loft, hang it on the big nail and pour water in
it. If it holds water, I will once more take to me a wife; if it lets out
the water, so will I not." The girl did as she was told, but the water held the hole to- gether, and the boot was full up to the top. So she went and told
her father how it was. And he went up to see with his own eyes,
and as there was no mistake about it, he went to the widow and
courted her, and then they had the wedding.
The next morning, when the two girls awoke, there stood by the
bedside of the man's daughter milk to wash in and wine to drink,
and by the bedside of the woman's daughter there stood water to wash in and water to drink.
On the second morning there stood water to wash in and water
to drink for both of them ahke. On the third morning there stood
water to wash in and water to drink for the man's daughter, and
milk to wash in and wine to drink for the woman's daughter; and so it remaioed ever after. The woman hated her step-daughter, and
never knew how to treat her badly enough from one day to an-
The Three Little Men in the Wood 287
other. And she was jealous because her step-daughter was pleasant
and pretty, and her real daughter was ugly and hateful.
Once m winter, when it was freezing hard, and snow lay deep on
hill and vaUey, the woman made a frock out of paper, called her
step-daughter, and said, "Here, put on this frock, go out into the wood and fetch me a basket of strawberries; I have a great wish for
some."
"Oh dear," said the girl, "there are no strawberries to be found in winter; the ground is frozen, and the snow covers everything.
And why should I go in the paper frock? It is so cold out of doors
that one's breath is frozen; the wind wiU blow through it, and the
thorns will tear it oflF my back!"
"How dare you contradict mel" cried the step-mother, "he oflF,
and don't let me see you again till you bring me a basket of strawberries." Then she gave her a little piece of hard bread, and said,
"That wiU do for you to eat during the day," and she thought to
herself, "She is sure to be frozen or starved to death out of doors,
and I shall never set eyes on her again." So the girl went obediently, put on the paper frock, and started
out with the basket. The snow was lying everywhere, far and v^dde,
and there was not a blade of green to be seen. When she entered
the wood she saw a little house with three Httle men peeping out of
it. She wished them good-day, and knocked modestly at the door.
They called her in, and she came into the room and sat down by the side of the oven to warm herself and eat her breakfast.
The Httle men said, "Give us some of it." "Willingly," answered she, breaking her little piece of bread in two, and giving them half.
They then said, "What are you doing here in the wood this winter
time in your little thin frock?" "Oh," answered she, "I have to get a
basket of strawberries, and I must not go home without them." When she had eaten her bread they gave her a broom, and told
her to go and sweep the snow away from the back door. When she
had gone outside to do it the httle men talked among themselves
about what they should do for her, as she was so good and pretty,
and had shared her bread with them. Then the first one said, "She
shall grow prettier every day." The second said, "Each time she
speaks a piece of gold shall fall from her mouth." The third said,
"A king shall come and take her for his wife." In the meanwhile the girl was doing as the little men had told
her, and had cleared the snow from the back of the little house, and
what do you suppose she found?— fine ripe strawberries, showing
dark red against the snowl Then she joyfully filled her little basket
288 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
full, thanked the little men, shook hands with them all, and ran
home in haste to bring her step-mother the thing she longed for. As
she went in and said, "Good evening," a piece of gold fell from her mouth at once. Then she related all that had happened to her in the
wood, and at each word that she spoke gold pieces fell out of her
mouth, so that soon they were scattered all over the room.
"Just look at her pride and conceit!" cried the step-sister, "throwing money about in this wayl" but in her heart she was jealous be- cause of it, and wanted to go too into the wood to fetch strawberries. But the mother said, "No, my dear Kttle daughter, it is too
cold, you will be frozen to death." But she left her no peace, so at last the mother gave in, got her a
splendid fur coat to put on, and gave her bread and butter and
cakes to eat on the way.
The girl went into the wood and walked straight up to the Httle
house. The three little men peeped out again, but she gave them no
greeting, and without looking round or taking any notice of them
she came stumping into the room, sat herself down by the oven,
and began to eat her bread and butter and cakes.
"Give us some of that," cried the Httle men, but she answered,
'Tve not enough for myself; how can I give away any?"
Now when she had done with her eating, they said, "Here is a
broom, go and sweep all clean by the back door." "Oh, go and do it
yourselves," answered she; "I am not your housemaid." But when she saw that they were not going to give her anything,
she went out to the door. Then the three little men said among
themselves, "What shall we do to her, because she is so unpleasant, and has such a wicked jealous heart, grudging everybody everything?" Jhe first said, "She shall grow ugHer every day." The second said, "Each time she speaks a toad shall jump out of her mouth
at every word." The third said, "She shall die a miserable death," The girl was looking outside for strawberries, but as she found
none, she went sulkily home. And directly she opened her mouth to
teU her mother what had happened to her in the wood a toad
sprang out of her mouth at each word, so that every one who came
near her was quite disgusted.
The step-mother became more and more set against the man's daughter, whose beauty increased day by day, and her only
thought was how to do her some injury. So at last she took a kettle,
set it on the fire, and scalded some yam in it. When it was ready
she hung it over the poor girl's shoulder, and gave her an axe, and she was to go to the frozen river and break a hole in the ice, and
The Three Little Men in the Wood 289
there to rinse the yam. She obeyed, and went and hewed a hole in
the ice, and as she was about it there came by a splendid coach, in
which the King sat. The coach stood still, and the King said, "My
child, who art thou, and what art thou doing there?" She answered,
"I am a poor girl, and am rinsing yam." Then the Eling felt pity for her, and as he saw that she was very
beautiful, he said, "Will you go with me?" "Oh yes, with all my
heart," answered she; and she felt very glad to be out of the way of her mother and sister.
So she stepped into the coach and went off with the King; and
when they reached his castle the wedding was celebrated with
great splendor, as the little men in the wood had foretold.
» At the end of a year the young Queen had a son; and as the stepmother had heard of her great good fortune she came with her
daughter to the castle, as if merely to pay the King and Queen a
visit. One day, when the King had gone out, and when nobody was
about, the bad woman took the Queen by the head, and her daughter took her by the heels, and dragged her out of bed, and threw her out of the window into a stream that flowed beneath it. Then
the old woman put her ugly daughter in the bed, and covered her
up to her chin. When the King came back, and wanted to talk to
his wife a httle, the old woman cried, "Stop, stopl she is sleeping
nicely; she must be kept quiet today." The King dreamt of nothing wrong, and came again the next
morning; and as he spoke to his wife, and she answered him, there
jumped each time out of her mouth a toad instead of the piece of
gold as heretofore. Then he asked why that should be, and the old
woman said it was because of her great weakness, and that it would
pass away.
But in the night, the boy who slept in the kitchen saw how something in the likeness of a duck swam up the gutter, and said,
"My King, what mak'st thou?
Sleepest thou, or wak'st thou?*
But there was no answer. Then it said,
"What cheer my two guests keep they?"
So the kitchen-boy answered,
"In bed all soundly sleep they."
It asked again,
"And my little baby, how does he?"
200 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
And he answered,
"He sleeps in his cradle quietly."
Then the duck took the shape of the Queen, and went to the
child, and gave him to drink, smoothed his little bed, covered him
up again, and then, in the likeness of a duck, swam back down the
gutter. In this way she came two nights, and on the third she said
to the kitchen-boy, "Go and tell the King to brandish his sword three times over me on the thresholdl"
Then the Idtchen-boy ran and told the King, and he came with his sword and brandished it three times over the duck, and at the
third time his wife stood before him living, and hearty, and sound, as she had been before.
The King was greatly rejoiced, but he hid the Queen in a chamber until the Simday came when the child was to be baptized. And
after the baptism he said, "What does that person deserve who
drags another out of bed and throws him in the water?" And the
old woman answered, "No better than to be put into a cask with
iron nails in it, and to be rolled in it down the hill into the water."
Then said the King, "You have spoken your own sentence"; and he ordered a cask to be fetched, and the old woman and her daughter were put into it, and the top hammered down, and the cask was rolled down the hill iuto the river.
The White Bride and the Black Bride
A WOMAN was going about the coimtryside with her daughter and
her step-daughter, when the Lord came towards them in the form
of a poor man, and asked, "Which is the way into the village?" 'If
you want to know," said the mother, "seek it for yourself," and the
daughter added, 'If you are afraid you will not find it, take a guide
with you." But the step-daughter said, "Poor man, I will take you
there, come with me." Then God was angry with the mother and daughter, and turned
His back on them, and wished that they should become as black as
night and as ugly as sin. To the poor step-daughter, however, God
was gracious, and went with her, and when they were near the village. He said a blessing over her, and spake, "Choose three things
The White Bride and the Black Bride 291
for thyself, and I will grant them to thee."' Then said the maiden, 1
should like to be as beautiful and fair as the sun," and instantly she
was white and fair as day. *Then I should like to have a purse of
money which would never grow empty." The Lord gave her that
also, but He said, "Do not forget what is best of all." She said. Tor my third wish, I desire, after my death, to inhabit the eternal kingdom of Heaven." That also was granted unto her, and then the Lord left her.
When the step-mother came home with her daughter, and they
saw that they were both as black as coal and ugly, but that the
step-daughter was white and beautiful, wickedness increased still
more in their hearts, and they thought of nothing else but how they
could do her an injury. The step-daughter, however, had a brother
called Reginer, whom she loved much, and she told him all that
had happened. Once on a time Reginer said to her, 'Dear sister, I will take thy likeness, that I may continually see thee before mine
eyes, for my love for thee is so great that I should like always to
look at thee." Then she answered, "But, I pray thee, let no one see
the picture." So he painted his sister and hung up the pictmre in his
room; he, however, dwelt in the King's palace, for he was his coachman.
Every day he went and stood before the picture, and thanked
God for the happiness of having such a dear sister. Now it happened that the King whom he served had just lost his wife, wHo
had been so beautiful that no one could be found to compare with
her, and on this account the King was in deep grief. The attendants
about the court, however, remarked that the coachman stood daily
before this beautiful picture, and they were jealous of him, so they
informed the King. Then the latter ordered the picture to be
brought to him, and when he saw that it was like his lost wife in
every respect, except that it was stiU more beautiful, he fell mortally in love with it. He caused the coachman to be brought before
him, and asked whom that portrait represented. The coachman said
it was his sister, so the King resolved to take no one but her as his
wife, and gave him a carriage and horses and splendid garments of
cloth of gold, and sent him forth to fetch his chosen bride.
When Reginer came on this errand, his sister was glad, but the
black maiden was jealous of her good fortune, and grew angry
above all measure, and said to her mother, "Of what use are aU your arts to us now when you cannot procure such a piece of luck
for me?" "Be quiet," said the old woman, "I will soon divert it to
you"— and by her arts of witchcraft, she so troubled the eyes of the
292 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
coachman that he was half-blind, and she stopped the ears of the
white maiden so that she was half-deaf. Then they got into the carriage, first the bride in her noble royal apparel, then the stepmother with her daughter, and Reginer sat on the box to drive.
When they had been on the way for some time the coachman cried,
"Cover thee well, my sister dear. That the rain may not wet thee.
That the wind may not load thee with dust,
That thou mayst he fair and beautiful
When thou appearest before the King."
The bride asked, "What is my dear brother saying?" "Ah," said
the old woman, "he says that you ought to take off your golden
dress and give it to your sister." Then she took it off, and put it on the black maiden, who gave her in exchange for it a shabby gray
gown. They drove onwards, and a short time afterwards, the
brother again cried,
"Cover thee well, my sister dear. That the rain may not wet thee,
That the wind may not load thee with dust.
That thou mayst be fair and beautiful
When thou appearest before the King."
The bride asked, "What is my dear brother saying?" "Ah," said
the old woman, "he says that you ought to take off your golden
hood and give it to your sister." So she took off the hood and put it on her sister, and sat with her own head uncovered. And they drove
on farther. After a while, the brother once more cried,
"Cover thee well, my sister dear. That the rain may not wet thee.
That the wind may not load thee with dust,
That thou mayst be fair and beautiful
When thou appearest before the King."
The bride asked, "What is my dear brother saying?" "Ah," said
the old woman, "he says you must look out of the carriage." They were, however, just on a bridge, which crossed deep water. When
the bride stood up and leant forward out of the carriage, they both
pushed her out, and she fell into the middle of the water. At the
same moment that she sank, a snow-white duck arose out of the
mirror-smooth water, and swam down the river. The brother had
observed nothing of it, and drove the carriage on until they reached
the court. Then he took the black maiden to the King as his sister.
The White Bride and the Black Bride 293
and thought she really was so, because his eyes were dim, and he
saw the golden garments glittering. When the King saw the boundless ugliness of his intended bride, he was very angry, and ordered
the coachman to be thrown into a pit which was full of adders and
nests of snakes. The old witch, however, knew so well how to flatter
the King and deceive his eyes by her arts, that he kept her and her
daughter until she appeared quite endurable to him, and he really married her.
One evening when the black bride was sitting on the King's knee, a white duck came swimming up the gutter to the kitchen, and said
to the kitchen-boy, "Boy, light a fire, that I may warm my
feathers." The kitchen-boy did it, and lighted a fire on the hearth. Then came the duck and sat down by it, and shook herself and
smoothed her feathers to rights with her bill. While she was thus
sitting and enjoying herself, she asked, "What is my brother Reginer doing?" The scullery-boy replied, "He is imprisoned in the pit
with adders and with snakes." Then she asked, "What is the black
witch doing in the house?" The boy answered, "She is loved by the
King and happy." "May God have mercy on him," said the duck, and swam forth by the sink.
The next night she came again and put the same questions, and
the third night also. Then the Idtchen-boy could bear it no longer,
and went to the King and discovered all to him. The King, how- ever, wanted to see it for himself, and next evening went thither,
and when the duck thrust her head in through the sink, he took his
sword and cut through her neck, and suddenly she changed into a
most beautiful maiden, exactly like the picture which her brother
had made of her. The King was full of joy, and as she stood there
quite wet, he caused splendid apparel to be brought and had her
clothed in it. Then she told how she had been betrayed by cunning
and falsehood, and at last thrown down into the water, and her first
request was that her brother should be brought forth from the pit
of snakes, and when the King had fulfilled this request, he went
into the chamber where the old witch was, and asked, "What does
she deserve who does this and that?" and related what had hap- pened. Then was she so blinded that she was aware of nothing and
said, "She deserves to be stripped naked, and put into a barrel with nails, and that a horse should be harnessed to the barrel, and the
horse sent all over the world." All of which was done to her, and to her black daughter. But the King married the white and beautiful
bride, and rewarded her faithful brother, and made him a rich and
distinguished man.
Brother and Sister
A BROTHER took his sister's hand and said to her,
"Since our mother died we have had no good days; our step- mother beats us every day, and if we go near her she lacks us away;
we have nothing to eat but hard crusts of bread left over; the dog
imder the table fares better; he gets a good piece every now and
then. If our mother only knew, how she would pity usl Come, let us
go together out into the wide worldl" So they went, and journeyed the whole day through fields and
meadows and stony places, and if it rained the sister said, "The
skies and we are weeping together." In the evening they came to a great wood, and they were so
weary with hunger and their long journey, that they chmbed up
into a high tree and fell asleep.
The next morning, when they awoke, the sun was high in heaven,
and shone brightly through the leaves. Then said the brother,
"Sister, I am thirsty; if I only knew where to find a brook, that I
might go and drinkl I almost think that I hear one rushing." So the brother got down and led his sister by the hand, and they went to
seek the brook. But their wicked step-mother was a witch, and had
known quite well that the two children had run away, and had
sneaked after them, as only witches can, and had laid a spell on all
the brooks in the forest. So when they found a little stream flowing
smoothly over its pebbles, the brother was going to drink of it; but
the sister heard how it said in its rushing,
"He a tiger will be who drinks of me.
Who drinks of me a tiger will beF'
Then the sister cried, "Pray, dear brother, do not drink, or you
will become a wild beast, and will tear me in pieces." So the brother refrained from drinking, though his thirst was
great, and he said he would wait till he came to the next brook.
When they came to a second brook the sister heard it say,
"He a wolf will be who drinks of me.
Who drinks of me a wolf will be!"
Then the sister cried, "Pray, dear brother, do not drink, or you
wiU be tiimed into a wolf, and will eat me upl"
Brother and Sister 295
So the brother refrained from drinkmg, and said, "I will wait until we come to the next brook, and then I must drink, whatever
you say; my thirst is so great." And when they came to the third brook the sister heard how in
its rushing it said,
"He a fawn will be who drinks of me.
Who drinks of me a fawn will hel"
Then the sister said, "O my brother, I pray drink not, or you will
be turned into a fawn, and nm away far from me." But he had already kneeled by the side of the brook and stooped
and drunk of the water, and as the first drops passed his lips he became a fawn. And the sister wept over her poor lost brother, and
the fawn wept also, and stayed sadly beside her. At last the maiden
said, "Be comforted, dear fawn, indeed I will never leave you."
Then she untied her golden girdle and bound it round the fawn's neck, and went and gathered rushes to make a soft cord, which she
fastened to him; and then she led him on, and they went deeper
into the forest. And when they had gone a long long way, they
came at last to a httle house, and the maiden looked inside, and as
it was empty she thought, "We might as well live here." And she fetched leaves and moss to make a soft bed for the fawn,
and every morning she went out and gathered roots and berries
and nuts for herself, and fresh grass for the favm, who ate out of
her hand with joy, frolicking round her. At night, when the sister
was tired, and had said her prayers, she laid her head on the fawn's back, which served her for a pillow, and softly fell asleep. And if
only the brother could have got back his own shape again, it would
have been a charming life. So they lived a long while in the wilder- ness alone.
Now it happened that the King of that country held a great hunt
in the forest. The blowing of the horns, the barking of the dogs,
and the lusty shouts of the himtsmen sounded through the wood,
and the fawn heard them and was eager to be among them.
"Oh," said he to his sister, "do let me go to the hunt; I cannot
stay behind any longer," and begged so long that at last she con- sented.
"But mind," said she to him, "come back to me at night. I must lock my door against the wild htmters, so, in order that I may know
you, you must knock and say, 'Little sister, let me in,' and unless I hear that I shall not unlock the door." Then the fawn sprang out, and felt glad and merry in the open
296 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
air. The King and his huntsmen saw the beautiful animal, and
began at once to pursue him, but they could not come within reach
of him, for when they thought they were certain of him he sprang
away over the bushes and disappeared. As soon as it was dark he
went back to the little house, knocked at the door, and said, TLittle
sister, let me in." Then the door was opened to him, and he went in, and rested the
whole night long on his soft bed. The next morning the hunt began
anew, and when the fawn heard the hunting-horns and the tally-ho
of the huntsmen he could rest no longer, and said, TLittle sister, let
me out, I must go." The sister opened the door and said, "Now,
mind you must come back at night and say the same words." When the King and his hunters saw the fawn with the golden
collar again, they chased him closely, but he was too nimble and
swift for them. This lasted the whole day, and at last the hunters
surroimded him, and one of them wounded his foot a little, so that
he was obliged to Hmp and to go slowly. Then a hunter slipped
after him to the little house, and heard how he called out, "Little
sister, let me in," and saw the door open and shut again after him directly. The hunter noticed aU this carefully, went to the King, and
told him all he had seen and heard. Then said the King, "Tomorrow we will hunt again." But the sister was very terrified when she saw that her fawn was
wounded. She washed his foot, laid cooling leaves round it, and
said, "Lie down on your bqd, dear fawn, and rest, that you may be
soon well." The wound was very sHght, so that the fawn felt noth- ing of it the next morning. And when he heard the noise of the
hunting outside, he said, "1 cannot stay in, I must go after them; I
shall not be taken easily again!" The sister began to weep, and said,
"I know you will be killed, and I left alone here in the forest, and
forsaken of everybody. I cannot let you go!"
"Then I shall die here with longing," answered the fawn; "when I hear the soimd of the horn I feel as if I should leap out of my
sldn." Then the sister, seeing there was no help for it, unlocked the
door with a heavy heart, and the fawn boimded away into the forest, well and merry. When the King saw him, he said to his himters,
"Now, follow him up all day long till the night comes, and see that
you do him no hurt." So as soon as the sun had gone down, the King said to the huntsmen: "Now, come and show me the Httle house in the wood." And
when he got to the door he knocked at it, and cried, "Little sister,
Brother and Sister 297
let me inl" Then the door opened, and the King went in, and there stood a maiden more beautiful than any he had seen before.
The maiden shrieked out when she saw, instead of the fawn, a
man standing there with a gold crown on his head. But the King
looked kindly on her, took her by the hand, and said, "Will you go
with me to my castle, and be my dear wife?" "Oh yes," answered
the maiden, "but the fawn must come too. I could not leave him."
And the King said, "He shall remain with you as long as you Uve,
and shall lack nothing." Then the fawn came bounding in, and the sister tied the cord of rushes to him, and led him by her own hand
out of the little house.
The King put the beautiful maiden on his horse, and carried her
to his castle, where the wedding was held with great pomp; so she
became lady Queen, and they lived together happily for a long
while; the fawn was well tended and cherished, and he gamboled
about the castle garden.
Now the wicked step-mother, whose fault it was that the children were driven out into the world, never dreamed but that the sister
had been eaten up by wild beasts in the forest, and that the
brother, in the Hkeness of a fawn, had been slain by the hunters.
But when she heard that they were so happy, and that things had
gone so well with them, jealousy and envy arose in her heart, and
left her no peace, and her chief thought was how to bring misfor- tune upon them.
Her own daughter, who was as ugly as sin, and had only one eye,
complained to her, and said, "I never had the chance of being a
Queen." "Never mind," said the old woman, to satisfy her; "when
the time comes, I shall be at hand." After a while the Queen brought a beautiful baby boy into the
world, and that day the King was out hunting. The old witch took
the shape of the bed-chamber woman, and went into the room
where the Queen lay, and said to her, "Come, the bath is ready; it will give you refreshment and new strength. Quick, or it wall be
cold." Her daughter was within call, so they carried the sick Queen into
the bath-room, and left her there. And in the bath-room they had
made a great fire, so as to suflFocate the beautiful young Queen.
When that was managed, the old woman took her daughter, put a
cap on her, and laid her in the bed in the Queen's place, gave her
also the Queen's form and countenance, only she could not restore the lost eye. So, in order that the King might not remark it, she had
to He on the side where there was no eye.
298 Grimms Complete Fairy Tales
In the evening, when the King came home and heard that a little
son was bom to him, he rejoiced with all his heart, and was going
at once to his dear wife's bedside to see how she did. Then the old
woman cried hastily, "For your life, do not draw back the curtains,
to let in the light upon her; she must be kept quiet." So the King went away, and never knew that a false Queen was lying in the bed.
Now, when it was midnight, and every one was asleep, the nurse,
who was sitting by the cradle in the nursery and watching there
alone, saw the door open, and the true Queen come in. She took the
child out of the cradle, laid it in her bosom, and fed it. Then she
shook out its little pillow, put the child back again, and covered it
with the coverlet. She did not forget the fawn either; she went to
him where he lay in the comer, and stroked his back tenderly.
Then she went in perfect silence out at the door, and the nurse next
morning asked the watchmen if any one had entered the castle during the night, but they said they had seen no one. And the Queen
came many nights, and never said a word; the nurse saw her always, but she did not dare speak of it to any one.
After some time had gone by in this manner, the Queen seemed
to find voice, and said one night,
"My child my fawn twice more I come to see. Twice more I come and then the end must he."
The nurse said nothing, but as soon as the Queen had disappeared she went to the King and told him all. The King said, "Ah, heavenl what do I hearl I will myself watch by the child tomorrow
night." So at evening he went into the nursery, and at midnight the
Queen appeared, and said,
"My child my fawn once more I come to see. Once more I come, and then the end must he!*
And she tended the child, as she was accustomed to do, before
she vanished. The King dared not speak to her, but he watched
again the following night, and heard her say,
"My child my fawn this once I come to see. This once I come, and now the end must he."
Then the King could contain himself no longer, but rushed towards her, saying, "You are no other than my dear wife!" Then she
answered, "Yes, I am your dear wife," and in that moment, by the
The Gold Children 299
grace of heaven, her life returned to her, and she was once more
well and strong. Then she told the King the snare that the wicked
witch and her daughter had laid for her.
The King had them both brought to judgment, and sentence was
passed upon them. The daughter was sent away into the woods,
where she was devoured by the wild beasts, and the witch was
burned, and ended miserably. As soon as her body was in ashes the
spell was removed from the fawn, and he took human shape again.
Then the sister and brother lived happily together until the end.
The Gold Children
A LONG time ago there lived in a little cottage a poor fisherman and
his wife, who had very little to live upon but the fish the husband
caught. One day as he sat by the water throwing his net he saw a
fish drawn out which was quite golden. He examined it with wonder; but what was his smprise to hear it say, "Listen, fisherman! if you will throw me again in the water, I will change your little hut
into a splendid castle."
The fisherman replied, "What would be the use of a castle to me
when I have nothing to eat?"
"On that account," said the gold fish, '1 will take care that there shall be a cupboard in the castle in which, when you unlock it, you
will find dishes containing everything to eat that heart can wish."
'If it is so," said the man, "then I am quite willing to do as you
please." "There is, however, one condition," continued the fish; "you must not mention to a living creature in the world, be it who it may, the
source of your good fortune. If you utter a single word, it will at
once be at an end." The man, upon this, threw the fish back into the water, and went home. But where his little hut had once stood now rose the walls of
a large castle.
He stared with astonishment, and then stepped in and saw his
wife dressed in costly clothes, and sitting in a handsomely
furnished room. She seemed quite contented, and yet she said,
"Husband, how has all this happened? I am so pleased!"
"Yes," said the man, "it pleases me also; but I am so hungry; give
300 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
me something to eat in our fine house!" "Oh dearl" she replied, *1
have nothing, and I don't know where any is to be foimd here."
"There will be no trouble on that account," he replied. "Do you see
that great cupboard? Just unlock it." When the cupboard was opened they saw with surprise that it
contained every requisite for a beautiful feast— bread, meat, vegeta- bles, cake, wine, and fruit.
"Dear husband," cried the wife, full of joy, "what more can we desire than this?"
Then they sat down, and ate and drank together in great com- fort.
After they had finished the wife said, "Husband, where do all
these good things and riches come from?" "Ahl" he replied, "do not ask me; I dare not tell you. If I disclose anything all our good fortune will come to an end."
"Very well," she replied, "if I am not to be told I shall not desire
to know"; but this was merely pretense, for she gave her husband no peace night or day, and she tormented and worried the poor
man so terribly that she exhausted his patience, and he told her at last.
"This good fortune," he said, "all comes from a wonderful gold fish which I caught, and afterward gave it freedom by throwing it
back into the water." No sooner had he uttered these words than the castle with its
wonderful cupboard disappeared, and they were again sitting in
the fisherman's hut. The husband was now again obliged to follow his trade and go fishing, and as luck would have it he again caught
the golden fish.
"Listenl" cried the fish; "if you will again throw me into the water I will once more give you a castle and a cupboard full of
good things; but be firm this time, and reveal to no one from whom
it comes, or all will be again lost." *T will keep it to myself," an- swered the fisherman, and threw the fish into the water.
Everything at home now was in its former splendor, and the
fisherman's wife joyful over their good fortune; but her cmiosity gave her no peace, and two days had scarcely passed before she
began to ask how it all happened, and what was the cause.
Her husband kept silence for a long time, but at last she made
him so angry that he incautiously revealed the secret. In a moment
the castle and all that it contained vanished, and they were again
sitting in their little old hut.
"See what you have done!" he said. "We shall have again to
The Gold Children 301
starve with hunger." "Oh, weU," she replied, "I would rather not have such riches if I am not to know where they come from; it destroys my peace." The husband again went fishing, and after a time what should he
again pull up in his net but the gold fish for the third time.
"Listen!" cried the fish; "1 see I am always to fall into your hands; therefore you must take me to your house, and cut me in
two pieces. These you must place in the ground, and you will have
gold enough to last your life." The man took the fish home, and did exactly as he had been told.
It happened after a while that from the pieces of the fish placed
in the earth two golden lilies sprang up, which were taken great care of.
Not long after the fisherman's wife had two little children, but they were both golden, as well as the two Httle foals in the stable.
The children grew tall and beautiful, and the lilies and the foals
grew also.
One day the children said to their father, 'We should like to ride
out and see the world on our golden steeds. Will you let us?"
But the parents answered sorrowfully, "How shall we be able to endure the thought that you are far away from us and perhaps ill or
in danger?" "Oh," they replied, "the two golden lilies will remain, and by them you can always tell how we are going on. If they are
fresh, we are in health; if they fade, we are sick; and when they
fall, we shall diel" So the parents let them go, and they rode away for some time till
they came to an ion where a number of people were staying. But
when they saw the two gold children they began to laugh and
make a mockery of them.
As soon as one of them heard the laughter and mocking words he
would not go any further, but turned back and went home to his fa- ther. The other, however, rode on tiU he came to a large forest. As
he was about to enter the forest some people came by and said,
"You had better not ride there, for the wood is fuU of robbers who will overcome you and rob you, especially when they see that you
and your horse are golden, and you will both be IdUed." He would not, however, allow himself to be frightened, but said,
"I must and will ride throughl" He took bearskins and threw them over himself and his horse,
that the gold might not be seen, and rode confidently into the
wood. He had not ridden far when he heard a rustling in the
bushes, and voices spealdng audibly to each other.
302 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
"That is one!" said a voice; but the other said, "No; let him alone —he has nothing on but a bearskin, and is, I dare say, as poor and
cold as a church mouse. What do we want with him?" So the gold child rode through the wood, and no harm happened to him.
One day he came to a town in which he saw a maiden who appeared to him so beautiful that he did not think there could be an- other so beautiful in the world.
And as his love became stronger for her he went to her and said,
"I love you with my whole heartl Will you be my wife?"
The maiden was so pleased that she answered willingly, "Yes, I
will be your wife, and be true to you as long as I live." Very soon after they were married, and just as they were enjoying themselves with the guests on the wedding-day, the bride's fa- ther returned home. When he found his daughter already married,
he was much astonished, and said, "Where is the bridegroom?" He was pointed out to him, and he still wore the bearskin dress. On
seeing him he exclaimed in great anger, "My daughter shall never have a bearskin wearer for a husband!" and wanted to murder him. But the bride interceded for him as much as she could, and said,
"He is already my husband, and I shall always love him with my
whole heart." And at last her father was appeased. However, he could not help thinking about it all night, and in the morning, when
the bridegroom was dressing, he peeped into his room, and saw a
noble-looking golden man, and the bearskin lying on the ground.
Then he went back to his own room and said to himself, "How for- tunate it is that I restrained my anger last night, or I should have
committed a great crime!" The same morning the gold child told his wife that he had
dreamed of being in the hunt and catching a beautiful stag, so that
he must on that day go out hunting.
She was very uneasy at the thought, and said, "Pray don't go; a
misfortune might so easily happen to you." But he replied, "I will
and must go!" As soon as he was ready he rode out into the wood, and had not
been there long before he saw just such a stag as the one in his
dream. He raised his gun to shoot it, but the stag sprang away, and
he followed it over hedges and ditches the whole day without feeling tired. At last, as night came on, it vanished from his eyes.
Then the gold child looked round him and saw close by a small
house in which sat an old woman, who was a witch; but he did not
The Gold Children 303
know it. He knocked at the door, and she came out and asked him
what he wanted so late as that in the middle of the wood.
He said, "Have you seen a stag pass this way?" "Yes," she replied; "I know the stag weU." And while she spoke a httle dog that had come out of the house
with the old woman began to bark furiously. "Be quiet, will you,"
he cried, "you spiteful cur, or I will shoot youl"
"Whatl you will kill my dog?" cried the old witch in a rage. "Ah,
I'll soon stop that." And in a moment he lay on the ground turned into stone.
His bride waited for his return in vain, and thought, "Something has certainly happened to him, or else why am I so anxious and
troubled in my heart?" On the same evening the brother, who was at home, was standing by the golden lily, when it suddenly fell drooping on its stem.
"Ah me!" he exclaimed; "there has some misfortune happened to my brother; I must go to him. Very likely I shall be able to save
him."
Then said his father, "No, no; stay here. If I were to lose both
of you, what should I do?" But the youth answered, "I must and
will go and find my brother." Then he mounted his golden horse and rode away quickly to the
wood where his brother lay turned to stone.
The old witch saw him in the distance, and came out of her
house, and tried to mislead him about his brother, and called to
him to come in. But he would not go near her, and raising his gun
he cried, "If you do not this moment restore my brother to life, I
wiU shoot you deadl" She saw he was in earnest, yet she moved imwillingly toward a
stone that lay near the door, touched it with her finger, and immediately the gold child stood before his brother in his own form.
They were both overjoyed to meet again, and kissed and embraced
each other. Then they rode together out of the wood, and there
they parted— the one to hasten back to his bride, the other home to
his parents.
"Ah," said his father, "we knew that your brother had been released from his trouble, for the golden lily is again erect and in
full bloom." And after this they lived in happiness and contentment for the
rest of their days.
The Twin Brothers
There "were once two brothers; one was rich, the other poor. The rich brother was a goldsmith, and had a wicked heart. The poor
brother supported himself by making brooms, and was good and
honest. He had two children, twin brothers, who resembled each
other as closely as one drop of water resembles another. The two
boys went sometimes to the house of their rich uncle to get the
pieces that were left from the table, for they were often very himgry.
It happened one day that while their father was in the wood,
gathering rushes for his brooms, he saw a bird whose plumage
shone like gold— he had never seen in his life any bird like it. He
picked up a stone and threw it at the bird, hoping to be lucky
enough to secure it; but the stone only knocked oflE a golden
feather, and the bird flew away.
The man took the feather and brought it to his brother, who,
when he saw it, exclaimed, "That is real gold!" and gave him a great deal of money for it. Another day, as the man cUmbed up a
beech tree, hoping to find the golden bird's nest, the same bird flew over his head, and on searching further he found a nest, and in it
lay two golden eggs. He took the eggs home and showed them to
his brother, who said again, "They are real gold," and gave him
what they were worth. At last the goldsmith said, "You may as weU
get me the bird, if you can." So the poor brother went again to the wood, and after a time,
seeing the bird perched on a tree, he knocked it down with a stone
and brought it to his brother, who gave him a large heap of money
for it. "Now," thought he, "1 can support myself for the future," and went home to his house full of joy.
The goldsmith, however, who was clever and cunning, knew well
the real value of the bird. So he called his wife, and said, "Roast the gold bird for me, and be careful that no one comes in, as I wish
to eat it quite alone." The bird was, indeed, not a common bird; it had a wonderful
power even when dead. For any person who ate the heart and liver
would every morning find under his pillow a piece of gold. The
goldsmith's wife prepared the bird, stuck it on the spit, and left it to roast.
The Ttoin Brothers 305
Now, it happened that while it was roasting, and the mistress ab- sent from the kitchen about other household work, the two children
of the broom-binder came in and stood for a few moments watching the spit as it turned roimd. Presently two little pieces fell from
the bird into the dripping-pan underneath. One of them said, "I think we may have those two little pieces; no one will ever miss
them, and I am so hungry." So the children each took a piece and ate it up.
In a few moments the goldsmith's wife came in and saw that they
had been eating something, and said, "What have you been eating?" "Only two little pieces that fell from the bird," they replied.
"Ohl" exclaimed the wife in a great fright, "they must have been
the heart and Hver of the btrdl" and then, that her husband might not miss them, for she was afraid of his anger, she quickly killed a
chicken, took out the heart and hver, and laid them on the golden bird.
As soon as it was ready she carried it in to the goldsmith, who ate
it aU up, without leaving her a morsel. The next morning, however,
when he felt under his pillow, expecting to find the gold-pieces,
nothing was there.
The two children, however, who knew nothing of the good fortune which had befallen them, never thought of searching under
their piUow. But the next morning, as they got out of bed, something fell on the ground and tinkled, and when they stooped to pick
it up, there were two pieces of gold. They carried them at once to
their father, who wondered very much, and said, "What can this
mean?" As, however, there were two more pieces the next morning, and
again each day, the father went to his brother and told him of the
wonderful circumstances. The goldsmith, as he listened, knew well
that these gold-pieces must be the result of the children having
eaten the heart and hver of the golden bird, and therefore that he
had been deceived. He determined to be revenged, and though
hard-hearted and jealous, he managed to conceal the real truth
from his brother, and said to him, "Your children are in league with the Evil One; do not touch the gold, and on no account allow your
children to remain in your house any longer, for the Evil One has
power over them, and could bring ruin upon you through them." The father feared this power, and therefore, sad as it was to him,
he led the twins out into the forest and left them there with a
heavy heart.
When they found themselves alone the two children ran here and
3o6 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
there in the wood to try and discover the way home, but they wandered back always to the same place. At last they met a hmiter,
who said to them, "Whose children are you?"
"We are a poor broom-binder's children," they replied, "and oiu" father will not keep us any longer in the house because every morning there is a piece of gold found under our pillows."
"Ah," exclaimed the hunter, "that is not bad! Well, if you are honest, and have told me the truth, I will take you home and be a
father to you." In fact, the children pleased the good man, and as he had no children of his own, he gladly took them home with him.
While they were with him he taught them to hunt in the forest,
and the gold-pieces which they found every morning under their
pillows they gave to him; so for the future he had nothing to fear
about poverty.
As soon as the twins were groMm up their foster-father took them
one day into the wood, and said, "Today you are going to make your first trial at shooting, for I want you to be free if you like, and
to be hunters for yourselves." Then they went with him to a suitable point, and waited a long
time, but no game appeared. Presently the hunter saw flying over
his head a flock of wild geese, in the form of a triangle, so he said,
"Aim quickly at each comer and fire." They did so, and their first proof-shot was successful.
Soon after another flock appeared in the form of a figure 2.
"Now," he exclaimed, "shoot again at each comer and bring them
downl" This proof-shot was also successful, and the hunter directly
said, "Now I pronounce you free; you are quite accompKshed
sportsmen." Then the two brothers went away into the wood together, to hold
counsel with each other, and at last came to an agreement about
what they wished to do.
In the evening, when they sat down to supper, one of them said
to their foster-father, "We will not remain to supper, or eat one bit,
tiU you have granted us our request." "And what is your request?"
he asked. "You have taught us to hunt, and to earn our Hving," they
replied, "and we want to go out in the world and seek our fortune.
Will you give us permission to do so?"
The good old man replied joyfully, 'Tou speak like brave himters; what you desire is my own wish. Go when you will, you
wdU be sure to succeed." Then they ate and drank together joyfully. When the appointed day came the hunter presented each of
The Ttoin Brothers 307
them with a new rifle and a dog, and allowed them to take as much
as they would from his store of the gold-pieces. He accompanied
them for some distance on the way, and before saying fareweU he
gave them each a white penknife, and said, 'If at any time you should get separated from each other, the knife must be placed
crossways in a tree, one side of the blade turmhg east, the other
west, pointing out the road which each should take. If one should
die the blade will rust on one side; but as long as he lives it will
remain bright." After saying this he wished the brothers farewell, and they
started on their way.
After travehng for some time they came to an immense forest, so
large that it was impossible to cross it in one day. They stayed
there all night, and ate what they had in their game-bags; but for
two days they walked on through the forest without finding themselves any nearer the end.
By this time they had nothing left to eat, so one said to the other,
*'We must shoot something, for this hunger is not to be endured." So he loaded his gun, and looked about him. Presently an old hare
came running by; but as he raised his rifle the hare cried,
"Dearest hunters, let me live;
1 tdll to you my young ones give"
Then she sprang up into the bushes, and brought out two young
ones, and laid them before the hunters. The little animals were so
full of tricks and played about so prettily that the hunters had not
the heart to Idll them; they kept them, therefore, alive, and the little
animals soon learned to follow them about like dogs.
By and by a fox appeared, and they were about to shoot him, but
he cried also,
"Dearest hunters, let me live.
And I will you my young ones give"
Then he brought out two little foxes, but the hunters could not kill
them, so they gave them to the hares as companions, and the little
creatures followed the hunters wherever they went.
Not long after a wolf stepped before them out of the thicket, and
one of the brothers instantly leveled his gun at him, but the wolf
cried out,
'Dear, kind hunters, let me live;
I wiU to you my young ones give."
3o8 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
The hunters took the young wolves and treated them as they had
done the other animals, and they followed them also.
Presently a bear came by, and they quite intended to kill him,
but he also cried out,
"Dear, kind hunters, let me live.
And I will you my young ones give."
The two young bears were placed with the others, of whom there
were already eight.
At last who should come by but a lion, shaking his mane. The
hunters were not at all alarmed; they only pointed their guns at
him. But the lion cried out in the same manner,
"Dear, kind hunters, let me live.
And I will you two young ones give."
So he fetched two of his cubs, and the hunters placed them with
the rest. They had now two lions, two bears, two wolves, two foxes,
and two hares, who traveled with them and served them. Yet, after
all, their hunger was not appeased.
So one of them said to the fox, "Here, you little sneak, who are so
clever and sly, go find us something to eat."
Then the fox answered, "Not far from here lies a town where we
have many times fetched away chickens. I will show you the way." So the fox showed them the way to the village, where they
bought some provisions for themselves and food for the animals, and went on further.
The fox, however, knew quite well the best spots in that part of
the country, and where to find the hen-houses; and he could, above all, direct the hunters which road to take.
After traveling for a time in this way they could find no suitable
place for them all to remain together, so one said to the other, 'The
only thing for us to do is to separate"; and to this the other agreed. Then they divided the animals so that each had one Hon, one bear,
one wolf, one fox, and one hare. When the time came to say farewell they promised to live in brotherly love till death, stuck the
knives that their foster-father had given them in a tree, and then
one turned to the east, and the other to the west.
The youngest, whose steps we will follow first, soon arrived at a
large town, in which the houses were all covered with black crape.
He went to an inn, and asked the landlord if he could give shelter
to his animals. The landlord pointed out a stable for them, and
their master led them in and shut the door.
The Tunn Brothers 309
But in the wall of the stable was a hole, and the hare slipped
through easily and fetched a cabbage for herself. The fox followed,
and came back with a hen; and as soon as he had eaten it he weiit
for the cock also. The wolf, the bear, and the lion, however, were
too large to get through the hole. Then the landlord had a cow
killed and brought in for them, or they would have starved.
The hunter was just going out to see if his animals were being
cared for when he asked the landlord why the houses were so himg
with mourning crape. "Because," he replied, "tomorrow morning
our King's daughter will die." "Is she seriously iU, then?" asked the
hunter. "No," he answered; "she is in excellent health; still, she
must die." "What is the cause of this?" said the young man.
Then the landlord explained. "Outside the town," he said, "is a high moimtain in which dwells a dragon, who every year demands
a young maiden to be given up to him, otherwise he will destroy
the whole country. He has already devoured all the young maidens
in the town, and there are none remaining but the King's daughter. Not even for her is any favor shown, and tomorrow she must be
delivered up to him."
"Why do you not IdU the dragon?" exclaimed the yoimg hunter.
"Ahl" repHed the landlord, "many young knights have sought to do so, and lost their Hves in the attempt. The King has even promised his daughter in marriage to whoever wiU destroy the dragon,
and also that he shall be heir to his throne." The hunter made no reply to this; but the next morning he rose
early, and taking his animals with him climbed up the dragon's mountain.
There stood near the top a little church, and on the altar inside
were three full goblets, bearing this inscription: "Whoever drinks of these goblets wiU be the strongest man upon earth, and wiU dis- cover the sword which lies buried before the threshold of this
door." The hunter did not drink; he first went out and sought for the
sword in the ground, but he could not find the place. Then he returned and drank up the contents of the goblets. How strong it
made him feell And how quickly he found the sword, which, heavy
as it was, he could wield easily!
Meanwhile the hour came when the young maiden was to be
given up to the dragon, and she came out accompanied by the.
King, the marshal, and the courtiers.
They saw from the distance the himter on the mountain, and the
Princess, thinking it was the dragon waiting for her, would not go
310 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
on. At last she remembered that to save the town from being lost,
she must make this painful sacrifice, and therefore wished her father farewell. The King and the comt returned home full of great
sorrow. The King's marshal, however, was to remain, and see from a distance all that took place.
When the King's daughter reached the top of the mountain, she found, instead of the dragon, a handsome young hunter, who spoke
to her comforting words, and, telling her he had come to rescue
her, led her into the church, and locked her in.
Before long, with a rushing noise and a roar, the seven-headed
dragon made his appearance. As soon as he caught sight of the
himter he wondered to himself, and said at last, "What business
have you here on this moimtain?" "My business is a combat with
youl" replied the hunter.
"Many knights and nobles have tried that, and lost their lives,"
replied the dragon; "with you I shall make short work!" And he breathed out fire as he spoke from his seven throats.
The flames set fire to the dry grass, and the hunter would have been stifled with heat and smoke had not his faithful animals run
forward and stamped out the fire. Then in a rage the dragon drew
near, but the hunter was too quick for him; swinging his sword on
high, it whizzed through the air and, falling on the dragon, cut off three of his heads.
Then was the monster furious; he raised himself on his hind legs,
spat fiery flames on the hunter, and tried to overthrow him. But the
young man again swung his sword, and as the dragon approached,
he with one blow cut off three more of his heads. The monster, mad
with rage, sank on the ground, still trying to get at the hunter; but
the young man, exerting his remaining strength, had no difficulty in
cutting off his seventh head, and his tail; and then, finding he could
resist no more, he called to his animals to come and tear the dragon
in pieces. As soon as the combat was ended the hunter unlocked the church
door, and found the King's daughter lying on the ground; for dur- ing the combat all sense and life had left her, from fear and terror.
He raised her up, and as she came to herself and opened her eyes
he showed her the dragon torn in pieces, and told her that she was
released from all danger.
Oh, how joyful she felt when she saw and heard what he had
done! She said, "Now you will be my dear husband, for my father has himself promised me in marriage to whoever should kiU the
dragon."
The Tioin Brothers 311
Then she took off her coral necklace of five strings, and divided it
among the animals as a reward; the lion's share being in addition the gold clasp. Her pocket handkerchief, which bore her name, she
presented to the hunter, who went out, and cut the seven tongues
out of the dragon's heads, which he wrapped up carefully in the handkerchief.
After all the fighting, and the fire and smoke, the hunter felt so
faint and tired that he said to the maiden, "I think a little rest would do us both good after all the fight and the struggles with the
dragon that I have had, and your terror and alarm. Shall we sleep
for a little while before I take you home safely to your father's
house?" "Yes," she replied, "I can sleep peacefully now." So she laid herself down, and as soon as she slept he said to the
lion, "You must lie near and watch that no one comes to harm us." Then he threw himself on the ground, quite worn out, and was
soon fast asleep.
The Hon laid himself down at a little distance to watch; but he
was also tired and overcome with the combat, so he called to the
bear, and said, 'Xie down near me; I must have a little rest, and if
any one comes, wake me up." Then the bear lay down; but he was also very tired, so he cried
to the wolf, "Just lie down by me; I must have a Httle sleep, and if
anything happens, wake me up." The wolf complied; but as he was also tired, he called to the fox,
and said, 'Xie down near me; I must have a little sleep, and if anything comes, wake me up." Then the fox came and laid himself down by the wolf; but he too
was tired, and called out to the hare, "Lie down near me; I must
sleep a little, and, whatever comes, wake me up." The hare seated herself near the fox; but the poor Httle hare was
very tired, and although she had no one to ask to watch and call
her, she also went fast asleep. And now the King's daughter, the hunter, the bear, the Hon, the wolf, the fox, and the hare were all in
a deep sleep, while danger was at hand.
The marshal, from the distance, had tried to see what was going
on, and being surprised that the dragon had not yet flown away
with the King's daughter, and that all was quiet on the mountain, took courage, and ventured to cHmb up to the top. There he saw
the mangled and headless body of the dragon, and at a Httle distance the King's daughter, the hunter, and all the animals sunk in a deep sleep. He knew in a moment that the stranger hunter had
killed the dragon, and, being wicked and envious, he drew his
312 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
sword and cut off the hunter s head. Then he seized the sleeping
maiden by the arm, and carried her away from the mountain.
She woke and screamed; but the marshal said, **You are in my
power, and therefore you shall say that I have killed the dragon 1"
'1 cannot say so," she replied, "for I saw the hunter kill him, and
the animals tear him in pieces." Then he drew his sword, and threatened to kill her if she did not
obey him; so that to save her life she was forced to promise to say all he wished.
Thereupon he took her to the King, who knew not how to contain himself for joy at finding his dear child still alive, and that she
had been saved from the monsters power.
Then the marshal said, "I have killed the dragon and freed the
King's daughter, therefore I demand her for my wife, according to
the King's promise."
*ls this aU true?" asked the King of his daughter.
"Ah, yes," she replied, "I suppose it is true; but I shall refuse to
allow the marriage to take place for one year and a day. For,"
thought she, "lq that time I may hear something of my dear
hunter."
AU this while on the dragon's mountain the animals lay sleeping near their dead master. At last a large bmnble-bee settled on the
hare's nose, but she only whisked it off with her paw, and slept again. The bee came a second time, but the hare again shook him
off, and slept as soundly as before. Then came the bumble-bee a
third time, and stung the hare in the nose; thereupon she woke. As
soon as she was quite aroused she woke the fox; the fox, the wolf;
the wolf, the bear; and the bear, the lion.
But when the lion roused himself, and saw that the maiden was
gone and his master dead, he gave a terrible roar, and cried,
"Whose doing is this? Bear, why did you not wake me?" Then said
the bear to the woLf, "Wolf, why did you not wake me?" "Fox,"
cried the wolf, "why did you not wake me?" "Hare," said the fox,
"and why did you not wake me?" The poor hare had no one to ask why he did not wake her, and
she knew she must bear all the blame. Indeed, they were all ready
to tear her to pieces, but she cried, "Don't destroy my lifel I wiU re- store our master. I know a mountain on which grows a root that
will cure every womid and every disease if it is placed in the person's mouth; but the moimtain on which it grows Hes two hundred
miles from here."
The Twin Brothers 313
'Then,* said the Hon, "we will give you twenty-four hours, but
not longer, to find this root and bring it to us." Away sprang the hare very fast, and in twenty-four hours she returned with the root. As soon as they saw her the Hon quickly
placed the head of the hunter on the neck; and the hare, when she
had joined the woimded parts together, put the root into the
mouth, and in a few moments the heart began to beat, and life came back to the hunter.
On awaking he was terribly alarmed to find that the maiden
had disappeared. "She must have gone away while I slept," he said, "and is lost to me foreverl"
These sad thoughts so occupied him that he did not notice anything wrong about his head, but in truth the lion had placed it on
in such a hiury that the face was turned the wrong way. He first
noticed it when they brought him something to eat, and then he found that his face looked backward. He was so astonished that he
could not imagine what had happened, and asked his animals the
cause. Then the lion confessed that they had all slept in consequence of being so tired, and that when they at last awoke they
found the Princess gone, and himself lying dead, with his head cut
off. The lion told him also that the hare had fetched the healing
root, but in their haste they had placed the head on the wrong way.
This mistake, they said, could be easily rectified. So they took the
himter's head off again, turned it round, placed it on properly, and the hare stuck the parts together with the wonderful root. After
this the himter went away again to travel about the world, feeling
very sorrowful, and he left his animals to be taken care of by the
people of the town.
It so happened that at the end of a year he came back again to
the same town where he had freed the King's daughter and killed the dragon. This time, instead of black crape the houses were hung
with scarlet cloth. "What does it mean?" he said to the landlord.
"Last year when I came yom* houses were all hung with black
crape, and now it is scarlet cloth."
"Oh," repfied the landlord, 'last year we were expecting our
King's daughter to be given up to the dragon, but the marshal fought with him and killed him, and tomorrow his marriage with
the King's daughter will take place; that is the cause of our town
being so gay and bright— it is joy now instead of sorrow." The next day, when the marriage was to be celebrated, the
hunter said, 'Xandlord, do you believe that I shall eat bread from
the King's table here with any one who will join me?"
314 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
"1 will lay a hundred gold-pieces," replied the landlord, "that
you will do nothing of the kind.'' The hunter took the bet, and taking out his purse placed the
gold-pieces aside for payment if he should lose.
Then he called the hare, and said to her, "Go quickly to the cas- tle, dear Springer, and bring me some of the bread which the King
eats." Now, the hare was such an insignificant httle thing that no one
ever thought of ordering a conveyance for her, so she was obliged
to go on foot. "Oh," thought she, "when I am running through the
streets, suppose the cruel hoxmd should see me." Just as she got near the castle she looked behind her, and there truly was a hoxmd
ready to seize her. But she gave a start forward, and before the sentinel was aware rushed into the sentry-box. The dog followed, and
wanted to bring her out, but the soldier stood in the doorway and
would not let him pass, and when the dog tried to get in he struck
him with his staflF, and sent him away howHng. As soon as the hare saw that the coast was clear she rushed out
of the sentry-box and ran to the castle, and finding the door of the
room where the Princess was sitting open, she darted in and hid
under her chair. Presently the Princess felt something scratching
her foot, and thinking it was the dog, she said, "Be quiet, Sultan;
go awayl" The hare scratched again at her foot, but she stiU
thought it was the dog, and cried, "Will you go away, Sultan?" But the hare did not allow herself to be sent away, so she scratched the
foot a third time. Then the Princess looked down and recognized
the hare by her necklace. She took the creature at once in her arms,
carried her to her own room, and said, "Dear little hare, what do
you want?" The hare replied instantly, "My master, who killed the dragon, is here, and he has sent me to ask for some of the bread that the King
eats." Then was the King's daughter full of joy; she sent for the cook, and ordered him to bring her some of the bread which was made
for the King. When he brought it the hare cried, "The cook must
go with me, or that cruel hound may do me some harm." So the cook carried the bread, and went with the hare to the door of the
inn.
As soon as he was gone she stood on her hind legs, took the
bread in her fore-paws, and brought it to her master.
"Therel" cried the hxmter; "here is the bread, landlord, and the
himdred gold-pieces are mine."
The Twin Brothers 315
The landlord was much surprised, but when the hunter declared
he would also have some of the roast meat from the King's table, he
said: "The bread may be here, but I'U warrant you will get nothing
more."
The hunter called the fox, and said to him, "My fox, go and fetch
me some of the roast meat such as the King eats." The red fox knew a better trick than the hare: he went across the
fields, and slipped in without being seen by the hound. Then he
placed himself under the chair of the King's daughter, and touched her foot. She looked down immediately, and recognizing him by his
necklace, took him into her room. "What do you want, dear fox?" she asked.
"My master, who killed the dragon, is here," he replied, "and has sent me to ask for some of the roast meat that is cooked for the
King." The cook was sent for again, and the Princess desired him to
carry some meat for the fox to the door of the iim. On arriving, the
fox took the dish from the cook, and after whisking away the flies
that had settled on it, with his tail, brought it to his master.
"See, landlord," cried the hunter, "here are bread and meat such
as the King eats, and now I will have vegetables." So he called the
wolf, and said, "Dear wolf, go and fetch me vegetables such as the
King eats." Away went the wolf straight to the castle, for he had no fear of
anything, and as soon as he entered the room he went behind the
Princess and pulled her dress, so that she was obliged to look
round. She recognized the wolf irmnediately by the necklace, took
him into her chamber, and said, "Dear wolf, what do you want?"
He replied, "My master, who killed the dragon, is here, and has
sent me to ask for some vegetables such as the King eats." The cook was sent for again, and told to take some vegetables
also to the inn door; and as soon as they arrived the wolf took the dish from him and carried it to his master.
"Look here, landlord," cried the hunter, *1 have now bread, meat, and vegetables; but I will also have some sweetmeats from
the King's table." He called the bear, and said, "Dear bear, I know you are fond of sweets. Now go and fetch me some sweetmeats
such as the King eats." The bear trotted off to the castle, and every one ran away when
they saw him coming. But when he reached the castle gates, the
sentinel held his gun before him and would not let him pass in. But
the bear rose on his hind legs, boxed his ears right and left with his
3i6 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
fore-paws, and leaving him tumbled all of a heap in his sentry-box,
went into the castle. Seeing the King's daughter entering he fol- lowed her and gave a slight growl. She looked behind her and, recognizing the bear, called him into her chamber, and said, "Dear
bear, what do you want?"
"My master, who killed the dragon, is here," he replied, "and he has sent me to ask for some sweetmeats like those which the King
eats." The Princess sent for the confectioner, and desired him to bake
some sweetmeats and take them with, the bear to the door of the
inn. As soon as they arrived the bear first licked up the sugar drips
which had dropped on his fur, then stood upright, took the dish, and carried it to his master.
"See now, landlord," cried the hunter, "I have bread, and meat, and vegetables, and sweetmeats, and I mean to have vmie also,
such as the King drinks." So he called the Hon to him, and said,
"Dear lion, you drink tiU you are quite tipsy sometimes. Now go
and fetch me some wine such as the King drinks." As the Uon trotted through the streets all the people ran away
from him. The sentinel, when he saw him coming, tried to stop the
way; but the lion gave a little roar, and made him run for his Hfe.
Then the hon entered the castle, passed through the King's apartment, and knocked at the door of the Princess's room with his tail. The Princess, when she opened it and saw the Hon, was at first
rather frightened; but presently she observed on his neck the gold
necklace clasp, and knew it was the hunter's hon. She called him
into her chamber, and said, "Dear hon, what do you want?"
"My master, who killed the dragon," he rephed, "is here, and he
has sent me to ask for some wine, such as the King drinks."
Then she sent for the King's cup-bearer, and told him to give the
Hon some of the King's wine.
"I will go with him," said the Hon, "and see that he draws the
right sort." So the Hon went with the cup-bearer to the wine-cellar, and when he saw him about to draw some of the ordinary wine
which the King's vassals drank, the Hon cried, "StopI I will taste the
vwne first." So he drew himself a pint, and swallowed it down at a
gulp. "No," he sdd, "that is not the right sort." The cup-bearer saw he was found out; however, he went over to
another cask that was kept for the King's marshal. "StopI" cried the
Hon again, "1 will taste the wdne first." So he drew another pint and
drank it off. "Ahl" he said, "that is better, but still not the right
wine."
The Ttvin Brothers 317
Then the cup-bearer was angry, and said, "What can a stupid
beast like you understand about wine?" But the lion, with a lash of his tail, knocked him down, and before the man could move himself found his way stealthily into a Httle private cellar, in which were casks of wine never tasted by any
but the King. The Hon drew half a pint, and when he had tasted it,
he said to himself, "That is wine of the right sort." So he called the cup-bearer and made him draw six flagons full.
As they came up from the cellar into the open air the lion's head swam a little, and he was almost tipsy; but as the cup-bearer was
obliged to carry the wine for him to the door of the inn, it did not
much matter. When they arrived, the Hon took the handle of the bas- ket in his mouth, and carried the wine to his master.
"Now, Master landlord," said the hunter, "I have bread, meat, vegetables, sweetmeats, and wine, such as the King has, so I will sit
down and with my faithful animals enjoy a good meal"; and, indeed, he felt very happy, for he knew now that the King's daughter still loved him.
After they had finished, the hunter said to the landlord, "Now that I have eaten and drunk of the same provisions as the King, I
will go to the King's castle and marry his daughter."
"Well," said the landlord, "how that is to be managed I cannot tell, when she has already a bridegroom to whom she will today be
married." The hunter, without a word, took out the pocket handkerchief
which the King's daughter had given him on the dragon's moun- tain, and opening it, showed the landlord the seven tongues of the
monster, which he had cut out and wrapped in the handkerchief.
'That which I have so carefully preserved vidll help me," said the hunter.
The landlord looked at the handkerchief and said, "I may believe all the rest, but I would bet my house and farm-yard that you will
never marry the King's daughter."
"Very well," said the hunter, "I accept yoiu: bet, and if I lose,
there are my hundred gold-pieces"; and he laid them on the table. That same day, when the King and his daughter were seated at
table, the King said, "What did all those wild animals want who
came to you today, going in and out of my castle?" "I cannot teU
you yet," she replied; "but if you will send into the town for the
master of these animals, then I will do so." The King sent, on hearing this, a servant at once to the inn with
an invitation to the stranger who owned the animals, and the ser-
3i8 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
vant arrived just as the hunter had finished his bet with the land- lord.
"See, landlord!" he cried, "the King has sent me an invitation by
his servant; but I cannot accept it yet." He turned to the man who
waited, and said, "Tell my lord the King that I cannot obey his commands to visit him unless he sends me suitable clothes for a
royal palace, and a carriage with six horses, and servants to wait
upon me." The servant returned with the message, and when the King
heard it he said to his daughter, '"What shall I do?"
'T. would send for him as he requests," she replied. So they sent royal robes, and a carriage and six horses with servants, and when the hunter saw them coming he said to the landlord, "Seel they have sent for me as I wished." He dressed himself in the kingly clothes, took the handkerchief
containing the dragon's tongues, and drove away to the castle.
As soon as he arrived the King said to his daughter, "How shall I
receive him?" *1 should go and meet him," she replied. So the King went to meet him, and led him into the royal apartment, and all his animals followed. The King pointed him to a seat
by his daughter. The marshal sat on her other side as bridegroom, but the visitor knew it not.
Just at this moment the dragon s seven heads were brought into
the room to show to the company, and the King said: "These heads belonged to the dragon who was for so many years the terror of
this town. The marshal slew the dragon, and saved my daughters
life; therefore I have given her to him in marriage, according to my
promise." At this the hunter rose, and advancing, opened the seven throats
of the dragon, and said, "Where are the tongues?" The marshal turned white with fear, and knew not what to do. At
last he said in his terror, *T)ragons have no tongues."
"Liars get nothing for their pains," said the hunter; "the dragon's
tongues shall prove who was his conqueror 1" He unfolded the handkerchief as he spoke. There lay the seven
tongues. He took them up and placed each in the mouth of the
dragon's head to which it belonged, and it fitted exactly. Then he took up the pocket handkerchief which was marked with the name
of the King's daughter, showed it to the maiden, and asked her if
she had not given it to him. "Yes," she replied; "I gave it to you on
the day you kiUed the dragon." He called his animals to him, took from each the necklace, and
The Ttvin Brothers 319
from the lion the one with the golden clasp, and asked to whom
they belonged.
"They are mine," she replied; "they are a part of my cxjral neck- lace which had five strings of beads, which I divided among the
animals because they aided you in killing the dragon, and after- ward tore him in pieces. I cannot tell how the marshal could have
carried me away from you," she continued, "for you told me to He
down and sleep after the fatigue and fright I had endured."
"I slept myself," he repUed, "for I was quite worn out with my combat, and as I lay sleeping the marshal came and cut oflE my
head."
"I begin to understand now," said the King; "the marshal carried away my daughter, supposing you were dead, and made us believe
that he had killed the dragon, till you arrived with the tongues, the
handkerchief, and the necklace. But what restored you to life?" asked the King. Then the hunter related how one of his animals had healed him
and restored him to Kfe through the application of a wonderful
root, and how he had been wandering about for a whole year, and
had only returned to the town that very day, and heard from the
landlord of the marshal's deceit.
Then said the King to his daughter, "Is it true that this man
killed the dragon?"
"Yes," she answered, "quite true, and I can venture now to ex- pose the wickedness of the marshal; for he carried me away that
day against my wish, and forced me with threats to keep silent. I
did not know he had tried to kill the real slayer of the dragon, but I
hoped he would come back, and on that account I begged to have
the marriage put ofiF for a year and a day." The King, after this, ordered twelve judges to be summoned to
try the marshal, and the sentence passed upon him was that he
should be torn to pieces by wild oxen. As soon as the marshal was
punished the King gave his daughter to the hunter, and appointed
him to the high position of stadtholder over the whole kingdom.
The marriage caused great joy, and the hunter, who was now a
Prince, sent for his father and foster-father, and overloaded them vwth treasures.
Neither did he forget the landlord, but sent for him to come to
the castle, and said, "See, landlord, I have married the King's
daughter, and your house and farm-yard belong to me." 'That is
quite true," replied the landlord.
"Ah," said the Prince, "but I do not mean to keep them; they are
320 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
still yours, and I make you a present of the hundred gold-pieces
also." For a time the young Prince and his wife lived most happily together. He still, however, went out himting, which was his great
deHght, and his faithful animals remained with him. They hved,
however, in a wood close by, from which he could call them at any
time; yet the wood was not safe, for he once went in and did not
get out again very easily.
Whenever the Prince had a wish, to go hunting, he gave the King
no rest tiU he allowed him to do so. On one occasion, while riding
with a large nimiber of attendants in the wood, he saw at a distance a snow-white deer, and he said to his people, "Stay here till I come back; I must have that beautiful creature, and so many wiU
frighten her." Then he rode away through the wood, and only his animals followed him. The attendants drew rein, and waited till evening, but
as he did not come they rode home and told the young Princess
that her husband had gone into an enchanted forest to hunt a white
deer, and had not returned.
This made her very anxious, more especially when the morrow
came and he did not return; indeed, he could not, for he kept riding after the beautiful wild animal, but without being able to over- take it. At times, when he fancied she was within reach of his gun,
the next moment she was leaping away at a great distance, and at
last she vanished altogether.
Not till then did he notice how far he had penetrated into the
forest. He raised his horn and blew, but there was no answer, for
his attendants could not hear it; and then as night came on he saw
plainly that he should not be able to find his way home tiU the next
day, so he alighted from his horse, Ht a fire by a tree, and deter- mined to make himself as comfortable as he could for the night.
As he sat imder the tree by the fire, with his animals lying near
him, he heard, as he thought, a human voice. He looked round, but
could see nothing. Presently there was a groan over his head; he
looked up and saw an old woman sitting on a branch, who kept
grumbling, "Oh, oh, how cold I ami I am free2angr "If you are
cold, come down and warm yomrself,'' he said. "No, no," she replied; "your animals vwll bite me." 'Indeed they vidU do no such
thing. Come down, old mother," he said kindly; "none of them shall
hurt you." He did not know that she was a wicked witch, so when she said,
"I will throw you dovvni a little switch from the tree, and if you just
The Twin Brothers 321
touch them on the back with it they cannot hurt me," he did as she told him, and as soon as they were touched by the wand the animals were all turned to stone. Then she jumped down, and touching the Prince on the back with the switch, he also was instantly
turned into stone. Thereupon she laughed maliciously, and dragged
him and his animals into a grave where several similar stones lay.
When the Princess foimd that her husband did not return, her
anxiety and care increased painfully, and she became at last very
unhappy.
Now, it so happened that just at this time the twin brother of the
Prince, who since their separation had been wandering in the East,
arrived in the country of which his brother's father-in-law was King. He had tried to obtain a situation, but could not succeed, and
only his animals were left to him.
One day, as he was wandering from one place to another, it oc- curred to his mind that he might as well go and look at the knife
which they had stuck in the trunk of a tree at the time of their separation. When he came to it there was his brother's side of the knife half -rusted, and the other half still bright.
In great alarm he thought, "My brother must have fallen into some terrible trouble. I will go and find him. I may be able to rescue him, as the half of the knife is still bright." He set out with his animals on a journey, and while traveling
west came to the town in which his brother's wife, the King's daughter, lived. As soon as he reached the gate of the town the
watchman advanced toward him and asked if he should go and announce his arrival to the Princess, who had for two days been in
great trouble about him, fearing that he had been detained in the
forest by enchantment.
The watchman had not the least idea that the young man was
any other than the Prince himself, especially as he had the wild ani- mals running behind him. The twin brother saw this, and he said to
himself, "Perhaps it vAU be best for me to allow myself to be taken
for my brother; I shall be able more easily to save him." So he fol- lowed the sentinel to the castle, where he was received with great
joy.
The young Princess had no idea that this was not her husband,
and asked him why he had remained away so long.
He replied, "I rode a long distance into the wood, and could not
find my way out again." At night he was taken to the royal bed, but he laid a two-edged sword between him and the young Princess; she did not know what that could mean, but did not venture to ask.
322 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
In a few days he discovered all about his brother that he wished
to know, and was determined to go and seek for him in the enchanted wood. So he said, "I must go to the hunt just once more." The King and the young Princess said all they could to dissuade
him, but to no purpose, and at length he left the castle with a large
company of attendants.
When he reached the wood aU happened as it had done with his
brother. He saw the beautiful white deer, and told his attendants to
wait while he went after it, followed only by his animals; but nei- ther could he overtake it; and the white deer led him far down into
the forest, where he foimd he must remain aU night.
After he had lighted a fire he heard, as his brother had done, the
old woman in the tree, crying out that she was freezing with cold,
and he said to her, "If you are cold, old mother, come down and
warm yom-self!" "No," she cried, "your animals wiU bite mel" "No,
indeed they will not," he said. "I can't trust them!" she cried; "here, I will throw you a little switch, and if you gently strike them across
the back, then they will not be able to hurt me." When the himter heard that he began to mistrust the old woman,
and said, "No; I will not strike my animals; you come down, or I
will fetch you." "Do as you Hke," she said; "you can't hurt me." "If
you don't come down," he replied, "I will shoot you." "Shoot
away," she said; "your bullet can do me no harm." He pointed his gun and shot at her; but the witch was proof
against a leaden bullet. She gave a shrill laugh, and cried, "It is no
use trying to hit me." The hunter knew, however, what to do; he cut ofiF three silver
buttons from his coat, and loaded his gun with them. Against these
she knew all her arts were vain; so as he drew the trigger she fell
suddenly to the ground with a scream. Then he placed his foot
upon her, and said, "Old witch, if you do not at once confess where
my brother is, I will take you up and throw you into the fire."
She was in a great fright, begged for pardon, and said, "He is
lying with his animals, turned to stone, in a grave."
Then he forced her to go with him, and said, "You old cat, if you
don't instantly restore my brother to life, and all the creatures that
are with him, over you go into the fire." She was obliged to take a switch and strike the stones, and immediately the brother, his animals, and many others— traders, mechanics, and shepherds— stood before him, alive and in their own forms.
Thankful for having gained their freedom and their Hves, they all
The Twin Brothers 323
hastened home; but the twin brothers, when they saw each other
again, were full of joy, and embraced and kissed each other with
great affection. They seized the old witch, bound her, and placed
her on the fire, and as soon as she was burned the forest became
suddenly clear and Hght, and the King's castle appeared at a very little distance.
After this the twin brothers walked away together toward the
castle, and on the road related to each other the events that had
happened to them since they parted. At last the youngest told his
brother of his marriage to the King's daughter, and that the King had made him lord over the whole land.
"I know all about it," replied the other; "for when I came to the town, they all took me for you and treated me with kingly state;
even the yoimg Princess mistook me for her husband, and made me
sit by her side." But as he spoke his brother became so fierce with jealousy and
anger that he drew his sword and cut off his brother's head. Then as he saw him lie dead at his feet his anger was quelled in a moment, and he repented bitterly, crying, "Oh, my brother is dead,
and it is I who have killed him!" and kneeling by his side he mourned with loud cries and tears.
In a moment the hare appeared and begged to be allowed to
fetch the life-giving root, which she knew would cure him. She was
not away long, and when she retiuned, the head was replaced and
fastened with the healing power of the plant, and the brother re- stored to life, while not even a sign of the woimd remained to be noticed.
The brothers now walked on most lovingly together, and the one
who had married the King's daughter said, "I see that you have kingly clothes, as I have; your animals are the same as mine. Let us
enter the castle at two opposite doors, and approach the old King
from two sides together." So they separated; and as the King sat wdth his daughter in the
royal apartment a sentinel approached him from two distant en- trances at the same time, and informed him that the Prince, vnth
his animals, had arrived. "That is impossible!" cried the King; "one of you must be wrong; for the gates at which you watch are quite a
quarter of a mile apart." But while the King spoke the two young men entered at opposite
ends of the room, and both came forward and stood before the
King.
With a bewildered look the King turned to his daughter, and
324 GrimrrCs Complete Fairy Tales
said, "Which is your husband? For they are both so exactly alike I cannot tell." She was herself very much frightened, and could not speak; at
last she thought of the necklace that she had given to the animals,
and looking earnestly among them she saw the gHtter of the golden
clasp on the lion's neck. "See," she cried in a happy voice, "he
whom that lion follows is my husband!"
The Prince laughed, and said, "Yes; you are right; and this is my
twin brother." So they sat down happily together and told the King and the
young Princess aU their adventures.
When the King's daughter and her husband were alone she said
to him, "Why have you for the last several nights always laid a
two-edged sword in our bed? I thought you had a wish to kiU me." Then the Prince knew how true and honorable his twin brother
had been.
Ferdinand the Faithful and
Ferdinand the Unfaithful
Once upon a time there Hved a man and a woman who, so long as
they were rich, had no children; but when they were poor they had
a little boy. They could, however, find no godfather for him, so the
man said he would just go to another place to see if he could get
one there. As he went, a poor man met him, who asked him where
he was going. He said he was going to see if he could get a godfa- ther; that he was poor, so no one would stand as godfather for him.
"Oh," said the poor man, "thou art poor, and I am poor; I will be godfather for thee, but I am so iU-ofiE I can give the child nothing. Go home and teU the nurse that she is to come to the church with
the child." When they all got to the church together, the beggar was already
there, and he gave the child the name of Ferdinand the Faithful.
When he was going out of the church, the beggar said, "Now go home, I can give thee nothing, and thou likewise ought to give me
nothing." But he gave a key to the nurse, and told her when she got home she was to give it to the father, who was to take care of it
Ferdinand the Faithful 325
until the child was fourteen years old, and then he was to go on the
heath where there was a castle, which the key would fit, and that
all which was therein should belong to him.
Now when the child was seven years old and had grown very
big, he once went to play with some other boys, and each of them
boasted that he had got more from his godfather than the other;
but the child could say nothing, and was vexed, and went home
and said to his father, "Did I get nothing at all, then, from my godfather?" "Oh, yes," said the father, "thou hadst a key— if there is a
castle standing on the heath, just go to it and open it." Then the boy went thither, but no castle was to be seen, or heard of.
After seven years more, when he was fourteen years old, he again
went thither, and there stood the castle. When he had opened it,
there was nothing within but a horse— a white one. Then the boy
was so full of joy because he had a horse, that he mounted on it
and galloped back to his father. "Now I have a white horse, and I
will travel," said he. So he set out, and as he was on his way, a pen was lying on the road. At first he thought he would pick it up, but
then again he thought to himself, "Thou shouldst leave it lying there; thou wilt easily find a pen where thou art going, if thou hast
need of one." As he was thus riding away, a voice called after him,
"Ferdinand the Faithful, take it with thee." He looked around, but saw no one; then he went back again and picked it up.
When he had ridden a Kttle way farther, he passed by a lake, and
a fish was lying on the bank, gasping and panting for breath, so he
said, "Wait, my dear fish, I wiU help thee to get into the water," and he took hold of it by the tail, and threw it into the lake. Then
the fish put its head out of the water and said, "As thou hast helped me out of the mud, I will give thee a flute; when thou art in any
need, play on it, and then I wiU. help thee, and if ever thou lettest
anything fall in the water, just play and I wiU reach it out to thee." Then he rode away, and there came to him a man who asked him
where he was going. "Oh, to the next place." Then the man asked what his name was. 'Terdinand the Faithful." "Sol then we have
almost the same name, I am called Ferdinand the Unfaithful." And they both set out to the inn in the nearest place.
Now it was unfortunate that Ferdinand the Unfaithful knew everything that the other had ever thought and everything he was
about to do; he knew it by means of all lands of wicked arts.
There was, however, in the inn an honest girl, who had a bright
face and behaved very prettily. She fell in love with Ferdinand the
Faithful because he was a handsome man, and she asked him
326 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
whither he was going. "Oh, I am just traveling round about," said he. Then she said he ought to stay there, for the King of that country wanted an attendant or an outrider, and he ought to enter his
service. He answered he could not very well go to any one like that
and oflFer himself. Then said the maiden, "Oh, but I will soon do
that for thee." And so she went straight to the King, and told him that she knew of an excellent servant for him. He was well pleased
with that, and had Ferdinand the Faithful brought to him, and
wanted to make him his servant. He, however, liked better to be an
outrider, for where his horse was, there he also wanted to be, so the
King made him an outrider. When Ferdinand the Unfaitliful learnt
that, he said to the girl, "What! Dost thou help him and not me?"
"Oh," said the girl, "I will help thee too." She thought, "I must
keep friends with that man, for he is not to be trusted." She went to the King, and ofiFered him as a servant, and the King was wiUing.
Now when the King met his lords in the morning, he always
lamented and said, "Oh, if I had but my love with me." Ferdinand the Unfaithful was, however, always hostile to Ferdinand the
Faithful. So once, when the King was complaining thus, he said,
"Thou hast the outrider, send him away to get her, and if he does
not do it, his head must be struck off." Then the King sent for Fer- dinand the Faithful, and told him that there was, in this place or in
that place, a girl he loved, and that he was to bring her to him, and if he did not do it he should die.
Ferdinand the Faithful went into the stable to his white horse,
and complained and lamented, "Oh, what an unhappy man I am!"
Then some one behind him cried, "Ferdinand the Faithful, why
weepest thou?" He looked round but saw no one, and went on
lamenting; "Oh, my dear little white horse, now must I leave thee;
now must I die." Then some one cried once more, "Ferdinand the
Faithful, why weepest thou?" Then for the first time he was aware that it was his little white horse who was putting that question.
"Dost thou speak, my little white horse; canst thou do that?" And
again, he said, "I am to go to this place and to that, and am to
bring the bride; canst thou tell me how I am to set about it?" Then
answered the little white horse, "Go thou to the King, and say if he will give thee what thou must have, thou wilt get her for him. If he
will give thee a ship full of meat, and a ship full of bread, it will
succeed. Great giants dwell on the lake, and if thou takest no meat
with thee for them, they will tear thee to pieces, and there are the
large birds which would pick the eyes out of thy head if thou hadst
no bread for them."
Ferdinand the Faithful 327
Then the King made all the butchers in the land kill, and aW. the
bakers bake, that the ships might be filled. When they were full,
the little white horse said to Ferdinand the Faithful, "Now mount me, and go with me into the ship and then when the giants come, say,
'Peace, peace, my dear little giants, 1 have had thought of ye.
Something I have brought for ye.'
"When the birds come, thou shalt again say,
'Peace, peace, my dear little birds, I have had thought of ye.
Something I have brought for ye'
"They will do nothing to thee, and when thou comest to the cas- tle, the giants will help thee. Then go up to the castle, and take a
couple of giants with thee. There the Princess lies sleeping; thou
must, however, not awaken her, but the giants must lift her up, and
carry her in her bed to the ship." And now everything took place as the little white horse had said, and Ferdinand the Faithful gave the
giants and the birds what he had brought with him for them, and
that made the giants willing, and they carried the Princess in her
bed to the King. And when she came to the King, she said she
could not live, she must have her writings, they had been left in her
castle. Then by the instigation of Ferdinand the Unfaithful, Fer- dinand the Faithful was called, and the King told him he must
fetch the writings from the castle, or he should die.
Then he went once more into the stable, and bemoaned himself
and said, "Oh, my dear little white horse, now I am to go away
again, how am I to do it?" Then the little white horse said he was just to load the ships fuU again. So it happened again as it had happened before, and the giants and the birds were satisfied, and made
gentle by the meat. When they came to the castle, the white horse
told Ferdinand the Faithful that he must go in, and that on the
table in the Princess's bed-room lay the writings. And Ferdinand the Faithful went in, and fetched them. When they were on the
lake, he let his pen fall into the water. Then said the white horse,
"Now I cannot help thee at all." But he remembered his flute, and began to play on it, and the fish came with the pen in its mouth,
and gave it to him. So he took the writings to the castle, where the
wedding was celebrated.
The Queen, however, did not love the King because he had no
328 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
nose, but she would have much liked to love Ferdinand the Faithful. Once, therefore, when all the lords of the court were together,
the Queen said she could do feats of magic, that she could cut off
any one's head and put it on again, and that one of them ought just to try it. But none of them would be the first, so Ferdinand the
Faithful, again at the instigation of Ferdinand the Unfaithful, undertook it and she hewed off his head, and put it on again for him,
and it healed together directly, so that it looked as if he had a red thread round his throat.
Then the King said to her, "My child, and where hast thou learnt
that?" "Yes," she said, "I understand the art; shall I just try it on
thee also?" "Oh, yes," said he. But she cut off his head, and did not put it on again; but pretended that she could not get it on, and that
it would not keep fixed. Then the King was buried, but she married Ferdinand the Faithful.
He, however, always rode on his white horse, and once when he
was seated on it, it told him that he was to go on to the heath
which he knew, and gallop three times round it. And when he had
done that, the white horse stood up on its hind legs, and was
changed into a King's son.
The Three Black Princesses
East India was besieged by an enemy who would not retire until he had received six hundred dollars. Then the townsfolk caused it to
be proclaimed by beat of drum that whosoever was able to procure
the money should be burgomaster. Now there was a poor fisherman
who fished on the lake with his son, and the enemy came and took
the son prisoner, and gave the father six hundred dollars for him.
So the father went and gave them to the great men of the town,
and the enemy departed, and the fisherman became bxurgomaster.
Then it was proclaimed that whosoever did not say, "Mr. Burgomaster," should be put to death on the gallows. The son got away again from the enemy, and came to a great forest on a high mountain. The mountain opened, and he went into a
great enchanted castle, wherein chairs, tables, and benches were all
hung with black. Then came three young Princesses who were entirely dressed in black, but had a little white on their faces; they
The Three Black Princesses 329
told him he was not to be afraid, they would not hurt him, and that
he could deliver them. He said he would gladly do that, if he did
but know how. On this, they told him he must for a whole year not
speak to them and also not look at them, and what he wanted to
have he was just to ask for, and if they dared give him an answer
they would do so. When he had been there for a long while he said
he should hke to go to his father, and they told him he might go.
He was to take with him this purse with money, put on this coat,
and in a week he must be back there again.
Then he was caught up, and was instantly in East India. He
could no longer find his father in the fisherman's hut, and asked the people where the poor fisherman could be, and they told him he
must not say that, or he would come to the gallows. Then he went
to his father and said, "Fisherman, how hast thou got here?" Then
the father said, 'Thou must not say that, if the great men of the
town knew of that, thou wouldst come to the gallows." He, how- ever, would not stop, and was brought to the gallows.
When he was there, he said, "O, my masters, just give me leave
to go to the old fisherman's hut." Then he put on his old smock- frock, and came back to the great men, and said, TDo ye not now
see? Am I not the son of the poor fisherman? Did I not earn bread
for my father and mother in this dress?" Hereupon his father knew him again, and begged his pardon, and took him home with him,
and then he related all that had happened to him, and how he had
got into a forest on a high mountain, and the mountain had opened
and he had gone into an enchanted castle, where all was black, and
three young Princesses had come to him who were black except a
little white on their faces. And they had told him not to fear, and
that he could deliver them. Then his mother said that might very
likely not be a good thing to do, and that he ought to take a holywater vessel with him, and drop some boiling water on their faces.
He went back again, and he was in great fear, and he dropped
the water on their faces as they were sleeping, and they all turned
half-white. Then all the three Princesses sprang up, and said, 'Thou accursed dog, our blood shall cry for vengeance on theel Now there
is no man bom in the world, nor will any ever be bom who can set
us free! We have still three brothers who are bound by seven
chains— they shall tear thee to pieces." Then there was a loud shrieking all over the castle, and he sprang out of the window, and
broke his leg, and the castle sank into the earth again, the mountain
shut to again, and no one knew where the castle had stood.
Snow-White and the Seven Dwarfs
It was the middle of winter, and the snow-flakes were falling like
feathers from the sky, and a Queen sat at her window working, and
her embroidery-frame was of ebony. And as she worked, gazing at times out on the snow, she pricked her finger, and there fell from it
three drops of blood on the snow. And when she saw how bright
and red it looked, she said to herself, "Oh that I had a child as white as snow, as red as blood, and as black as the wood of the embroidery frame!" Not very long after she had a daughter, with a skin as white as
snow, lips as red as blood, and hair as black as ebony, and she was
named Snow-white. And when she was bom the Queen died.
After a year had gone by the King took another wife, a beautiful
woman, but proud and overbearing, and she could not bear to be
smpassed in beauty by any one. She had a magic looking-glass, and
she used to stand before it, and look in it, and say,
"Looking-glass upon the wall. Who is fairest of us aW
And the looking-glass would answer,
'you are fairest of them all."
And she was contented, for she knew that the looking-glass spoke the truth.
Now, Snow-white was growing prettier and prettier, and when
she was seven years old she was as beautiful as day, far more so
than the Queen herself. So one day when the Queen went to her
mirror and said,
it answered.
^Looking-glass upon the wall,
Who is fairest of us all?"
"Queen, you are full fair, 'tis true.
But Snou)-white fairer is than you'
This gave the Queen a great shock, and she became yellow and
green with envy, and from that hour her heart turned against
Snow-White and the Seven Dwarfs 331
Snow-white, and she hated her. And envy and pride like ill weeds
grew in her heart higher every day, until she had no peace day or
night. At last she sent for a huntsman, and said, 'Take the child out into the woods, so that I may set eyes on her no more. You must
put her to death, and bring me her heart for a token." The huntsman consented, and led her away; but when he drew
his cutlass to pierce Snow-white's irmocent heart, she began to
weep, and to say, "Oh, dear huntsman, do not take my life; I will
go away into the wild wood, and never come home again." And as she was so lovely the huntsman had pity on her, and said,
"Away with you then, poor child"; for he thought the wild animals would be sure to devour her, and it was as if a stone had been
rolled away from his heart when he did not put her to death. Just at
that moment a yoimg wild boar came running by, so he caught
and killed it, and taking out its heart, he brought it to the Queen for
a token. And it was salted and cooked, and the wicked woman ate it
up, thinking that there was an end of Snow-white.
Now, when the poor child foimd herself quite alone in the wild
woods, she felt full of terror, even of the very leaves on the trees,
and she did not know what to do for fright. Then she began to nm
over the sharp stones and through the thorn bushes, and the wild
beasts after her, but they did her no harm. She ran as long as her
feet would carry her; and when the evening drew near she came fo
a little house, and she went inside to rest. Everything there was
very small, but as pretty and clean as possible. There stood the Httle table ready laid, and covered with a white cloth, and seven little
plates, and seven knives and forks, and drinking-cups. By the wall
stood seven little beds, side by side, covered with clean white
quilts. Snow-white, being very hungry and thirsty, ate from each
plate a little porridge and bread, and drank out of each little cup a
drop of wine, so as not to finish up one portion alone. After that she
felt so tired that she lay down on one of the beds, but it did not
seem to suit her; one was too long, another too short, but at last the
seventh was quite right; and so she lay down upon it, committed
herself to Heaven, and fell asleep.
When it was quite dark, the masters of the house came home.
They were seven dwarfs, whose occupation was to dig under- grormd among the moimtains. When they had lighted their seven
candles, and it was quite light in the little house, they saw that
some one must have been in, as everything was not in the same
order in which they left it.
332 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
The first said, "Who has been sitting in my little chair?"
The second said, "Who has been eating from my little plate?"
The third said, "Who has been taking my little loaf?"
The fourth said, "Who has been tasting my porridge?"
The fifth said, "Who has been using my little fork?"
The sixth said, "Who has been cutting with my fittle knife?"
The seventh said, "Who has been drinking from my little cup?" Then the first one, looking round, saw a hollow in his bed, and
cried, "Who has been lying on my bed?" And the others came
running, and cried, "Some one has been on our beds tool" But when the seventh looked at his bed, he saw little Snow-white
lying there asleep. Then he told the others, who came running up,
crying out in their astonishment, and holding up their seven Httle
candles to throw a Hght upon Snow-white.
"O goodnessl O gracious!" cried they, "what beautiful child is
this?" and were so full of joy to see her that they did not wake her, but let her sleep on. And the seventh dwarf slept with his comrades, an hour at a time with each, until the night had passed.
When it was morning, and Snow-white awoke and saw the seven
dwarfs, she was very frightened; but they seemed quite friendly,
and asked her what her name was, and she told them; and then
they asked how she came to be in their house. And she related to
them how her step-mother had wished her to be put to death, and
how the huntsman had spared her life, and how she had run the
whole day long, until at last she had found their little house.
Then the dwarfs said, "If you will keep our house for us, and cook, and wash, and make the beds, and sew and knit, and keep everything tidy and clean, you may stay with us, and you shall lack
nothing."
"With all my heart," said Snow-white; and so she stayed, and kept the house in good order. In the morning the dwarfs went to
the mountain to dig for gold; in the evening they came home, and
their supper had to be readv for them. All the day long the maiden
was left alone, and the good little dwarfs warned her, saying, "Be- ware of your step-mother, she will soon know you are here. Let no
one into the house."
Now the Queen, having eaten Snow-white's heart, as she sup- posed, felt quite sure that now she was the first and fairest, and so
she came to her mirror, and said,
"Looking-glass upon the wall.
Who is fairest of us all?"
Snow-White and the Seven Dwarfs 333
And the glass answered,
"Queen, thou art of beauty rare. But Snow-white living in the glen With the seven little men
Is a thousand times mxyre fair."
Then she was very angry, for the glass always spoke the truth,
and she knew that the huntsman must have deceived her, and that
Snow-white must still be Hving. And she thought and thought how she could manage to make an end of her, for as long as she was not
the fairest in the land, envy left her no rest. At last she thought of a
plan; she painted her face and dressed herself like an old peddler
woman, so that no one would have known her. In this disguise
she went across the seven mountains, imtil she came to the house of
the seven Uttle dwarfs, and she knocked at the door and cried,
"Fine wares to seUI fine wares to selll"
Snow-white peeped out of the window and cried, "Good-day,
good woman, what have you to sell?"
"Good wares, fine wares," answered she, "laces of aU colors"; and she held up a piece that was woven of variegated silk.
"I need not be afraid of letting in this good woman," thought Snow-white, and she unbarred the door and bought the pretty lace.
"What a figure you are, childl" said the old woman, "come and
let me lace you properly for once." Snow-white, suspecting nothing, stood up before her, and let her
lace her with the new lace; but the old woman laced so quickly and
tightly that it took Snow-white's breath away, and she fell down as dead.
"Now you have done with being the fairest," said the old woman as she hastened away.
Not long after that, towards evening, the seven dwarfs came
home, and were terrified to see their dear Snow-white lying on the
ground, without life or motion; they raised her up, and when they
saw how tightly she was laced they cut the lace in two; then she
began to draw breath, and little by Httle she returned to life. When
the dwarfs heard what had happened they said, "The old peddler woman was no other than the wicked Queen; you must bewEure of
letting any one in when we are not here I" And when the wicked woman got home she went to her glass and
said,
"Looking-glass against the wall.
Who is fairest of us allF'
334 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
And it answered as before,
"Queen, thou art of beauty rare. But Snow-white living in the glen With the seven little men
Is a thousand times more fair."
When she heard that she was so struck with surprise that all the
blood left her heart, for she knew that Snow-white must stiU be living.
"But now," said she, "I will think of something that wiU be her
ruin." And by witchcraft she made a poisoned comb. Then she dressed herself up to look like another different sort of old woman. So she went across the seven mountains and came to the house of
the seven dwarfs, and knocked at the door and cried, "Good wares
to sell! good wares to seUI"
Snow-white looked out and said, "Go away, I must not let anybody in."
"But you are not forbidden to look," said the old woman, taking out the poisoned comb and holding it up. It pleased the poor child
so much that she was tempted to open the door; and when the bargain was made the old woman said, "Now, for once, your hair shall
be properly combed." Poor Snow-white, thinking no harm, let the old woman do as she
would, but no sooner was the comb put in her hair than the poison
began to work, and the poor girl fell dov^Ti senseless.
"Now, you paragon of beauty," said the wicked woman, "this is
the end of you," and went off. By good luck it was now near eve- ning, and the seven little dwarfs came home. When they saw Snowwhite lying on the ground as dead, they thought directly that it was
the step-mother's doing, and looked about, found the poisoned comb, and no sooner had they drawn it out of her hair than Snowwhite came to herself, and related all that had passed. Then they
warned her once more to be on her guard, and never again to let
any one in at the door.
And the Queen went home and stood before the looking-glass and said,
"Looking-glass against the wall.
Who is fairest of us allF'
And the looking-glass answered as before,
"Queen, thou art of beauty rare. But Snow-white living in the glen
Snow-White and the Seven Dwarfs 335
With the seven little men
Is a thousand times more fair."
When she heard the looking-glass speak thus she trembled and
shook with anger. "Snow-white shall die," cried she, "though it
should cost me my own lifel" And then she went to a secret lonely chamber, where no one was
likely to come, and there she made a poisonous apple. It was beautiful to look upon, being white with red cheeks, so that any one who
should see it must long for it, but whoever ate even a little bit of it
must die. When the apple was ready she painted her face and
clothed herself like a peasant woman, and went across the seven
mountains to where the seven dwarfs hved. And when she knocked
at the door Snow-white put her head out of the window and said,
'1 dare not let anybody in; the seven dwarfs told me not to."
"All right," answered the woman; "I can easily get rid of my
apples elsewhere. There, I will give you one."
"No," answered Snow-white, "I dare not take anything."
"Are you afraid of poison?" said the woman, 'look here, I will cut the apple in two pieces; you shall have the red side, I will have the
white one." For the apple was so cunningly made, that all the poison was in
the rosy half of it. Snow-white longed for the beautiful apple, and as she saw the peasant woman eating a piece of it she could no
longer refrain, but stretched out her hand and took the poisoned half. But no sooner had she taken a morsel of it into her mouth than
she fell to the earth as dead. And the Queen, casting on her a terrible glance, laughed aloud and cried, "As white as snow, as red as blood, as black as ebony! This time the dwarfs will not be able to
bring you to life again." And when she went home and asked the looking-glass,
"Looking-glass against the wall.
Who is fairest of us all?"
at last it answered, "You are the fairest now of all." Then her envious heart had peace, as much as an envious heart can have.
The dwarfs, when they came home in the evening, found Snowwhite lying on the groimd, and there came no breath out of her
mouth, and she was dead. They lifted her up, sought if anything
poisonous was to be found, cut her laces, combed her hair, washed
her with water and wine, but all was of no avail, the poor child was
dead, and remained dead. Then they laid her on a bier, and sat all
336 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
seven of them round it, and wept and lamented three whole days.
And then they would have buried her, but that she looked stiU as if
she were living, with her beautiful blooming cheeks.
So they said, "We cannot hide her away in the black ground." And they had made a coffin of clear glass, so as to be looked into
from all sides, and they laid her in it, and wrote in golden letters
upon it her name, and that she was a King's daughter. Then they set the coffin out upon the mountain, and one of them always
remained by it to watch. And the birds came too, and mommed for
Snow-white, first an owl, then a raven, and lastly, a dove.
Now, for a long while Snow-white lay in the coffin and never
changed, but looked as if she were asleep, for she was still as white
as snow, as red as blood, and her hair was as black as ebony.
It happened, however, that one day a King's son rode through
the wood and up to the dwarfs' house, which was near it. He saw on the mountain the coffin, and beautiful Snow-white within it, and
he read what was written in golden letters upon it. Then he said to
the dwarfs, "Let me have the coffin, and I will give you whatever
you like to ask for it." But the dwarfs told him that they could not part with it for all
the gold in the world. But he said, '1 beseech you to give it me, for I cannot live v^athout looking upon Snow-white; if you consent I
will bring you to great honor, and care for you as if you were my
brethren." When he so spoke the good little dwarfs had pity upon him and
gave him the coffin, and the King's son called his servants and bid them carry it away on their shoulders. Now it happened that as
they were going along they stumbled over a bush, and with the
shaking the bit of poisoned apple flew out of her throat. It was not
long before she opened her eyes, threw up the cover of the coffin,
and sat up, ahve and well.
"Oh dearl where am I?" cried she. The King's son answered, fuU
of joy, "You are near me," and, relating all that had happened, he
said, "1 wotJd rather have you than anything in the world; come
vidth me to my father's castle and you shall be my bride." And Snow-white was kind, and went with him, and their wedding was held with pomp and great splendor.
But Snow-white's wicked step-mother was also bidden to the feast, and when she had dressed herself in beautiful clothes she
went to her looking-glass and said,
"Looking-glass upon the wall. Who is fairest of us alW
The Shoes That Were Danced to Pieces 337
Tlie looking-glass answered,
"O Queen, although you are of beauty rare.
The young bride is a thousand times more fair."
Then she railed and cm-sed, and was beside herself with disap- pointment and anger. First she thought she would not go to the
wedding; but then she felt she should have no peace until she went
and saw the bride. And when she saw her she knew her for Snowwhite, and could not stir from the place for anger and terror. For
they had ready red-hot iron shoes, in which she had to dance until she fell down dead.
The Shoes That Were Danced to Pieces
Theee was once upon a time a King who had twelve daughters,
each one more beautiful than the other. They all slept together in
one chamber, in which their beds stood side by side, and every
night when they were in them the King locked the door, and bolted
it. But in the morning when he unlocked the door, he saw that their
shoes were worn out with dancing, and no one could find out how
that had come to pass. Then the King caused it to be proclaimed
that whosoever could discover where they danced at night, should
choose one of them for his wiie and be King after his death; but that whosoever came forward and had not discovered it within
three days and nights, should have forfeited his Hfe.
It was not long before a King's son presented himself, and ofiFered to undertake the enterprise. He was well received, and in the evening was led into a room adjoining the Princesses' sleeping- chamber. His bed was placed there, and he was to observe where
they went and danced, and in order that they might do nothing
secretly or go away to some other place, the door of their room was
left open.
But the eyelids of the Prince grew heavy as lead, and he fell
asleep, and when he awoke in the morning, aU twelve had been to
the dance, for their shoes were standing there with holes in the
soles. On the second and third nights it fell out just the same, and
then his head was struck off without mercy. Many others came
after this and undertook the enterprise, but all forfeited their Hves.
338 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
Now it came to pass that a poor soldier who had a wound, and
could serve no longer, found himself on the road to the town where
the King lived. There he met an old woman, who asked him where
he was going. "I hardly know myself," answered he, and added in
jest, 'Tl had half a mind to discover where the Princesses danced
their shoes into holes, and thus become King." "That is not so
difficult," said the old woman, "you must not drink the wane which wiU be brought to you at night, and must pretend to be sound
asleep." With that she gave him a little cloak, and said, "If you put on
that, you vvdll be invisible, and then you can steal after the twelve." When the soldier had received this good advice, he went into the
thing in earnest, took heart, went to the King, and announced him- self as a suitor. He was as well received as the others, and royal
garments were put upon him. He was conducted that evening at
bed-time into the ante-chamber, and as he was about to go to bed,
the eldest came and brought him a cup of wine, but he had tied a
sponge imder his chin, and let the wine run down into it, without
drinking a drop. Then he lay down and when he had lain a while,
he began to snore, as if in the deepest sleep.
The twelve Princesses heard that, and laughed, and the eldest
said, "He, too, might as well have saved his life." With that they got up, opened wardrobes, presses, cupboards, and brought out
pretty dresses; dressed themselves before the mirrors, sprang about,
and rejoiced at the prospect of the dance. Only the youngest said,
'1 know not how it is; you are very happy, but I feel very strange;
some misfortune is certainly about to befall us." "You are a goose,
who is always frightened," said the eldest. "Have you forgotten
how many Kings' sons have already come here in vain? I had hardly any need to give the soldier a sleeping-draught; in any case
the clown would not have awakened." When they were all ready they looked carefully at the soldier, but he had closed his eyes and
did not move or stir, so they felt themselves quite secure. The eld- est then went to her bed and tapped it; it immediately sank into the
earth, and one after the other they descended through the opening,
the eldest going first.
The soldier, who had watched everything, tarried no longer, put
on his little cloak, and went down last with the youngest. Half-way down the steps, he just trod a Uttle on her dress; she was terrified at
that, and cried out, "What is that? who is pulling at my dress?"
"Don't be so sillyl" said the eldest, "you have caught it on a nail." Then they went all the way down, and when they were at the
The Shoes That Were Danced to Pieces 339
bottom, they were standing in a wonderfully pretty avenue of trees,
all the leaves of which were of silver, and shone and glistened. The
soldier thought, "I must carry a token away with me," and broke oflF a twig from one of them, on which the tree cracked with a loud
report. The youngest cried out again, "Something is wrong, did you
hear the crack?" But the eldest said, "It is a gun fired for joy, because we have got rid of our Prince so quickly." After that they came into an avenue where all the leaves were of gold, and lastly
into a third avenue where they were of bright diamonds. He broke
off a twig from each, which made such a crack each time that the
youngest started back in terror, but the eldest still maintained that
they were salutes. They went on and came to a great lake whereon
stood twelve little boats, and in every boat sat a handsome Prince,
all of whom were waiting for the twelve, and each took one of them
with him, but the soldier seated himself by the youngest. Then her
Prince said, "I can't tell why the boat is so much heavier today; I
shall have to row with all my strength, if I am to get it across."
"What should cause that," said the youngest, "but the warm
weather? I feel very warm too." On the opposite side of the lake stood a splendid, brightly Ht castle, from whence resounded the
joyous music of trumpets and kettle-drums. They rowed over there,
entered, and each Prince danced with the girl he loved, but the soldier danced with them unseen, and when one of them had a cup of
wine in her hand he drank it up, so that the cup was empty when
she carried it to her mouth; the youngest was alarmed at this, but
the eldest always m^de her be silent.
They danced there till three o'clock in the morning when all the shoes were danced into holes, and they were forced to leave off.
The Princes rowed them back again over the lake, and this time the
soldier seated himself by the eldest. On the shore they took leave of
their Princes, and promised to return the following night. When
they reached the stairs the soldier ran on in front and lay down in
his bed, and when the twelve had come up slowly and wearily, he
was already snoring so loudly that they could all hear him, and
they said, "So far as he is concerned, we are safe." They took off their beautiful dresses, laid them away, put the worn-out shoes
under the bed, and lay down. Next morning the soldier was resolved not to speak, but to watch the wonderful goings on, and
again went with them.
Everything was done just as it had been done the first time, and
each time they danced until their shoes were worn to pieces. But
the third time he took a cup away with him as a token. When the
340 Grimin*s Complete Fairy Tales
hour had arrived for him to give his answer, he took the three twigs
and the cup, and went to the King, but the twelve stood behind the
door, and listened for what he was going to say. When the King put
the question, "Where have my twelve daughters danced their shoes
to pieces in the night?" he answered, 'In an underground castle
with twelve Princes," and related how it had come to pass, and brought out the tokens.
The King then summoned his daughters, and asked them if the
soldier had told the truth, and when they saw that they were betrayed, and that falsehood would be of no avail, they were obliged
to confess all. Thereupon the King asked which of them he would
have to wife. He answered, 'T am no longer young, so give me the
eldest." Then the wedding was celebrated on the self-same day,
and the kingdom was promised him after the King's death. But the Princes were bewitched for as many days as they had danced
nights with the twelve.
The Boots of Buffalo Leather
A SOLDIER who is afraid of nothing, troubles himself about nothing.
One of this kind had received his discharge, and as he had learnt
no trade and could earn nothing, he traveled about and begged
alms of kind people. He had an old water-proof on his back, and a
pair of riding-boots of buffalo leather which were still left to him.
One day he was walking, he knew not where, straight out into
the open cotmtry, and at length came to a forest. He did not know
where he was, but saw sitting on the trunk of a tree, which had
been cut down, a man who was well dressed and wore a green
shooting-coat. The soldier shook hands with him, sat down on the
grass by his side, and stretched out his legs. "1 see you have good
boots which are well blacked," said he to the huntsman; "but if you had to travel about as I have, they would not last long. Look at
mine, they are of buffalo leather, and have been worn for a long
time, but in them I can go through thick and thin." After a while
the soldier got up and said, "I can stay no longer, hunger drives me
onwards; but. Brother Bright-boots, where does this road lead to?"
*T don't know that myseff," answered the huntsman, "I have lost
my way in the=f orest." "Then you are in the same pHght as I," said
The Boots of Buffalo Leather 341
the soldier. "Birds of a feather flock together; let us remain together and seek our way." The huntsman smiled a little, and they
walked on further and further, until night fell. "We do not get out
of the forest," said the soldier, "but there in the distance I see a
light shining, which will help us to something to eat." They found a stone house, knocked at the door, and an old
woman opened it. "We are looking for quarters for the night," said
the soldier, "and some Hning for our stomachs, for mine is as empty
as an old knapsack." "You cannot stay here," answered the old
woman. "This is a robber's house, and you would do wisely to get
away before they come home, or you will be lost." "It won't be so
bad as that," answered the soldier, "I have not had a mouthful for two days, and whether I am murdered here or die of hunger in the
forest is all the same to me. I shall go in." The huntsman would not
follow, but the soldier drew him in with him by the sleeve. "Come,
my dear brother, we shall not come to an end so quickly as that!"
The old woman had pity on them and said, "Creep in here behind the stove, and if they leave anything, I will give it to you on the sly
when they are asleep." Scarcely were they in the corner before twelve robbers came bursting in, seated themselves at the table
which was aheady laid, and vehemently demanded some food. The
old woman brought in some great dishes of roast meat, and the robbers enjoyed that thoroughly.
When the smell of the food reached the nostrils of the soldier, he
said to the huntsman, "I cannot hold out any longer, I shall seat
myself at the table, and eat with them." "You will bring us to destruction," said the huntsman, and held him back by the arm. But the soldier began to cough loudly. When the robbers heard that,
they threw away their knives and forks, leapt up, and discovered
the two who were behind the stove. "Aha, gentlemen, are you in
the comer?" cried they, "what are you doing here? Have you been sent as spies? Wait a while, and you shall learn how to fly on a dry
bough." "But do be civil," said the soldier, "I am hungry, give me
something to eat, and then you can do what you Hke with me."
The robbers were astonished, and the captain said, "I see that you have no fear. Well, you shall have some food, but after that
you will die." "We shall see," said the soldier, and seated himself at the table, and began to cut away valiantly at the roast meat.
"Brother Bright-boots, come and eat," cried he to the huntsman.
"You must be as hungry as I am, and cannot have better roast meat
at home." But the huntsman would not eat. The robbers looked at
342 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
the soldier in astonishment, and said, "The rascal uses no ceremony." After a while he said, "I have had enough food, now get me
something good to drink." The captain was in the mood to humor
him in this also, and called to the old woman, "Bring a bottle out of
the cellar, and mind it be of the best." The soldier drew the cork out with a loud noise, and then went with the bottle to the himtsman and said, "Pay attention, brother, and you shall see something that will surprise you. I am now going to drink the health of the
whole clan." Then he brandished the bottle over the heads of the
robbers, and cried, "Long life to you all, but with your mouths
open and your right hands lifted up," and then he drank a hearty draught. Scarcely were the words said than they all sat motionless
as if made of stone, and their mouths were open and their right
hands stretched up in the air.
The huntsman said to the soldier, "I see that you are acquainted
with tricks of another kind, but now come and let us go home."
"Oho, my dear brother, but that would be marching away far too soon; we have conquered the enemy, and must first take the booty.
Those men there are sitting fast, and are opening their mouths with
astonishment, but they will not be allowed to move until I permit
them. Come, eat and drink." The old woman had to bring another bottle of the best wine, and the soldier would not stir imtil he had
eaten enough to last for three days. At last when day came, he said,
"Now it is time to strike our tents, and that our march may be a short one, the old woman shall show us the nearest way to the
town." When they had arrived there, he went to his old comrades, and
said, "Out in the forest I have found a nest fuU of gallows' birds,
come with me and we will take it." The soldier led them, and said
to the huntsman, "You must go back again with me to see how they
shake when we seize them by the feet." He placed the men round about the robbers, and then he took the bottle, drank a mouthful,
brandished it above them, and cried, "Live again." Instantly they air regained the power of movement, but were thrown down and bound hand and foot with cords. Then the soldier ordered them to
be thrown into a cart as if they had been so many sacks, and said,
"Now drive them straight to prison." The huntsman, however, took one of the men aside and gave him another commission besides.
"Brother Bright-boots," said the soldier, "we have safely routed the enemy and been well fed, now we will quietly walk behind them as
if we were stragglers!"
The Six Servants 343
When they approached the town, the soldier saw a crowd of people pouring through the gate of the town who were raising loud
cries of joy, and waving green boughs in the air. Then he saw that
the entire body-guard was coming up. "What can this mean?" said
he to the huntsman. "Do you not know," he replied, "that the King has for a long time been absent from his kingdom, and that today
he is returning, and every one is going to meet him?" "But where is
the King?" said the soldier, "I do not see him." "Here he is," answered the huntsman, "I am the King, and have announced my arrival." Then he opened his hunting-coat, and his royal garments were visible.
The soldier was alarmed, and fell on his knees and begged him to
forgive him for having in his ignorance treated him as an equal,
and spoken to him by such a name. But the King shook hands with
him, and said, "You are a brave soldier, and have saved my life. You shall never again be in want, I will take care of you. And if
ever you would like to eat a piece of roast meat as good as that in
the robber's hoiise, come to the royal kitchen. But if you would
drink a health, you must first ask my permission."
The Six Servants
In days of old there lived an aged Queen who was a sorceress, and
her daughter was the most beautiful maiden under the sun. The old
woman, however, had no other thought than how to lure mankind
to destruction, and when a wooer appeared, she said that whosoever wished to have her daughter, must first perform a task, or die.
Many had been dazzled by the daughter s beauty, and had actually
risked this, but they never could accomplish what the old woman
enjoined them to do, and then no mercy was shown; they had to
kneel down, and their heads were struck ofiF.
A certain King's son who had also heard of the maiden's beauty,
said to his father, "Let me go there, I want to demand her in marriage." "Never," answered the King; "if you were to go, it would be
going to your death." On this the son lay down and was sick imto death, and for seven years he lay there, and no physician could heal
him. When the father perceived that all hope was over, with a
heavy heart he said to him, "Go thither, and try your luck, for I
344 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
know no other means of curing you." When the son heard that, he rose from his bed and was well again, and joyfully set out on his way.
It came to pass that as he was riding across a heath, he saw from
afar something like a great heap of hay lying on the ground, and
when he drew nearer, he could see that it was the stomach of a
man, who had laid himself down there, but the stomach looked hke
a smaU mountain. When the fat man saw the traveler, he stood up
and said, "If you are in need of any one, take me into yom: service."
The Prince answered, "What can I do with such a great big man?"
"Oh," said the Stout One, "this is nothing, when I stretch myself
out well, I am three thousand times fatter." "If that's the case," said
the Prince, "I can make use of you, come with me." So the Stout One followed the Prince, and after a while they found another man
who was lying on the ground with his ear laid to the tvirf. "What
are you doing there?" asked the King's son. "1 am listening," replied
the man. "What are you hstening to so attentively?" "I am listening to what is just going on in the world, for nothing escapes my ears; I
even hear the grass growing." 'Tell me," said the Prince, "what you
hear at the court of the old Queen who has the beautiful daughter."
Then he answered, "I hear the whizzing of the sword that is
striking off a wooer's head." The King's son said, "I can make use of
you, come with me." They went onwards, and then saw a pair of feet lying and part of
a pair of legs, but could not see the rest of the body. When they
had walked on for a great distance, they came to the body, and at
last to the head also. "Why," said the Prince, "what a taU rascal
you are!" "Oh," replied the Tall One, "that is nothing at aU yet; when I really stretch out my Hmbs, I am three thousand times as
tall, and taller than the highest mountain on earth. I will gladly
enter your service, if you will take me." "Come with me," said the
Prince, "I can make use of you." They went onwards and found a man sitting by the road who had bound up his eyes. The Prince
said to him, "Have you weak eyes, that you cannot look at the
hght?" "No," replied the man, "but I must not remove the bandage, for whatsoever I look at with my eyes, splits to pieces, my glance is
so powerful. If you can use that, I shall be glad to serve you."
"Come with me," rephed the King's son, "I can make use of you." They journeyed onwards and foimd a man who was lying in the
hot sunshine, trembling and shivering all over his body, so that not
a Hmb was still. "How can you shiver when the sun is shining so
warm?" said the King's son. "Alack," replied the man, '1 am of
The Six Servants 345
quite a different nature. The hotter it is, the colder I am, and the
frost pierces through all my bones; and the colder it is, the hotter I
am. In the midst of ice, I cannot endure the heat, nor in the midst
of fire, the cold." "You are a strange fellow!" said the Prince, "but if
you will enter my service, follow me." They traveled onwards, and saw a man standing who made a
long neck and looked about him, and could see over all the mountains. "What are you looking at so eagerly?" said the King's son.
The man replied, "I have such sharp eyes that I can see into every
forest and field, and hill and valley, all over the world." The Prince
said, "Come with me if you will, for I am still in want of such an
one."
Now the King's son and his six servants came to the town where the aged Queen dwelt. He did not tell her who he was, but said,
*Tf you will give me your beautiful daughter, I will perform any
task you set me." The sorceress was deHghted to get such a handsome youth as this into her net, and said, "I will set you three tasks, and if you are able to perform them all, you shall be husband and
master of my daughter." "What is the first to be?" "You shall fetch
me my ring which I have dropped into the Red Sea." So the King's
son went home to his servants and said, "The first task is not easy. A ring is to be got out of the Red Sea. Come find some way of
doing it." Then the man with the sharp sight said, '1 will see where
it is lying," and looked down into the water and said, "It is sticking
there, on a pointed stone." The Tall One carried them thither, and
said, "1 would soon get it out, if I could only see it." "Oh, is that
all!" cried the Stout One, and lay down and put his mouth to the water, on which all the waves fell into it just as if it had been a
whirlpool, and he drank up the whole sea till it was as dry as a
meadow. The Tall One stooped down a fittle, and brought out the
ring with his hand.
Then the King's son rejoiced when he had the ring, and took it to
the old Queen. She was astonished, and said, "Yes, it is the right ring. You have safely performed the first task, but now comes the
second. Do you see the meadow in front of my palace? Three hundred fat oxen are feeding there, and these must you eat, skin, hair,
bones, horns and all; and down below in my cellar He three hundred casks of wine, and these you must drink up as well, and if one
hair of the oxen, or one little diop of the wine is left, your life will
be forfeited to me." "May I invite no guests to this repast?" inquired the Prince, "no dinner is good without some company." The
346 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
old woman laughed maliciously, and replied, "You may invite one
for the sake of companionship, but no more."
The King's son went to his servants and said to the Stout One,
"You shall be my guest today, and shall eat your fill." Hereupon the Stout One stretched himself out and ate up the three hundred oxen
without leaving one single hair, and then he asked if he was to have
nothing but his breakfast. He drank the wine straight from the
casks without feeling any need of a glass, and he licked the last
drop from his finger-nails. When the meal was over, the Prince went to the old woman, and
told her that the second task also was performed. She wondered at
this and said, "No one has ever done so much before, but one task
still remains," and she thought to herself, "You shall not escape me,
and will not keep your head on your shoulders! This night," said
she, "I will bring my daughter to you in yomr chamber, and you shall put yom: arms round her, but when you are sitting there together, beware of falling asleep. When twelve o'clock is striking, I
will come, and if she is then no longer in your arms, you are lost.**
The Prince thought, "The task is easy, I will most certainly keep
my eyes open." Nevertheless he called his servants, told them what
the old woman had said, and remarked, "Who knows what treach- ery may lurk behind this. Foresight is a good thing— keep watch,
and take care that the maiden does not go out of my room again." When night fell, the old woman came with her daughter, and gave
her into the Prince's arms, and then the Tall One wound himself round the two in a circle, and the Stout One placed himself by the
door, so that no living creature could enter. There the two sat, and
the maiden spake never a word, but the moon shone through the
window on her face, and the Prince could behold her wondrous
beauty. He did nothing but gaze at her, and was filled with love
and happiness, and his eyes never felt weary. This lasted until
eleven o'clock, when the old woman cast such a spell over all of them that they fell asleep, and at the self-same moment the maiden was carried away.
Then they all slept soundly until a quarter to twelve, when the
magic lost its power, and all awoke again. "Oh, misery and misfortunel" cried the Prince, "now I am lostl" The faithful servants also
began to lament, but the Listener said, "Be quiet, I want to listen."
Then he Hstened for an instant and said, "She is on a rock, three hundred leagues from hence, bewailing her fate. You alone. Tall
One, can help her; if you will stand up, you vwll be there in a couple of steps."
The Six Servants 347
"Yes," answered the Tall One, "but the one with the sharp eyes
must go with me, that we may destroy the rock." Then the Tall One took the one with bandaged eyes on his back, and in the twinlding
of an eye they were on the enchanted rock. The Tall One immediately took the bandage from the other's eyes, and he did but look round, and the rock shivered into a thousand pieces. Then the Tall
One took the maiden in his arms, carried her back in a second, then
fetched his companion with the same rapidity, and before it struck
twelve they were all sitting as they had sat before, quite merrily
and happily.
When twelve struck, the aged sorceress came stealing in with a
malicious face, which seemed to say, "Now he is minel" for she believed that her daughter was on the rock three hundred leagues
oflF. But when she saw her in the Prince's arms, she was alarmed,
and said, "Here is one who knows more than I do!" She dared not make any opposition, and was forced to give him her daughter. But
she whispered in her ear, *lt is a disgrace to you to have to obey common people, and that you are not allowed to choose a husband
to your own hking." At this the proud heart of the maiden was filled with anger, and
she meditated revenge. Next morning she caused three hundred
great bundles of wood to be got together, and said to the Prince
that though the three tasks were performed, she would still not be
his wife until some one was ready to seat himself in the midst of
the wood, and bear the fire. She thought that none of his servants
would let themselves be burnt for him, and that out of love for her,
he himself would place himself upon it, and then she would be
free. But the servants said, "Every one of us has done something
except the Frosty One, he must set to work," and they put him in the middle of the pile, and set fire to it. Then the fire began to
bum, and burnt for three days until all the wood was consumed,
and when the flames had burnt out, the Frosty One was standing
amid the ashes, trembling like an aspen leaf, and saying, "I never felt such a frost during the whole course of my fife; if it had lasted
much longer, I should have been benumbed!" As no other pretext was to be found, the beautiful maiden was
now forced to take the unknown youth as a husband. But when
they drove away to church, the old woman said, "I cannot endure
the disgrace," and sent her warriors after them with orders to cut down all who opposed them, and bring back her daughter. But the
Listener had sharpened his ears, and heard the secret discourse of
the old woman. "What shall we do?" said he to the Stout One. But
348 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
he knew what to do, and spat out once or twice behind the carriage some of the sea-water which he had drunk, and a great sea arose in which the warriors were caught and drowned. When the sorceress
perceived that, she sent her mailed knights; but the Listener heard
the rattling of their armor, and undid the bandage from one eye of
Sharp-eyes, who looked for a while rather fixedly at the enemy's troops, on which they all sprang to pieces like glass. Then the youth and the maiden went on their way undisturbed, and when the two had been blessed in church, the six servants took leave, and said to
their master, "Your wishes are now satisfied, you need us no longer, we will go our way and seek our fortunes."
Half a league from the palace of the Prince's father was a village near which a swineherd tended his herd, and when they came
thither the Prince said to his wife, "Do you know who I really am? I am no Prince, but a herder of swine, and the man who is there
with that herd is my father. We two shall have to set to work also,
and help him." Then he alighted with her at the inn, and secretly told the innkeepers to take away her royal apparel during the night. So when she awoke in the morning, she had nothing to put on, and
the innkeeper's wife gave her an old govm and a pair of worsted stockings, and at the same time seemed to consider it a great present, and said, "If it were not for the sake of your husband I should have given you nothing at alll" Then the Princess believed that he really was a swineherd, and tended the herd vnth him, and thought
to herself, '1 have deserved this for my haughtiness and pride." This lasted for a week, and then she could endure it no longer, for she had sores on her feet. And now came a couple of people who
asked if she knew who her husband was. "Yes," she answered, "he is a swineherd, and has just gone out with cords and ropes to try to
drive a Ifttle bargain." But tiiey said, "Just come with us, and we
will take you to him," and they took her to the palace, and when she entered the hall, there stood her husband in kingly raiment. But she did not recognize him until he took her in his arms, kissed her,
and said, "I suffered much for you, and now you, too, have had to suffer for me."
Then the wedding was celebrated. And he who has told you all
this, vidshes that he, too, had been present at it.
Six Soldiers of Fortune
There was once a man who was a Jack-of-all-trades. He had served in the war, and had been brave and bold, but at the end of it he
was sent about his business, with three farthings and his discharge.
"I am not going to stand this," said he. "Wait till I find the right man to help me, and the Eang shall give me all the treasures of his
kingdom before he has done with me." Then, full of wrath, he went into the forest, and he saw one
standing there by six trees which he had rooted up as if they had
been stalks of com. And he said to him, "Will you be my man, and
come along with me?"
"All right," answered he. "I must just take this bit of wood home
to my father and mother." And taking one of the trees, he bound it round the other five, and putting the faggot on his shoulder, he
carried it off; then soon coming back, he went along with his
leader, who said, "Two such as we can stand against the whole
world." And when they had gone on a little while, they came to a huntsman who was kneeling on one knee and taking careful aim with his rifle.
"Huntsman," said the leader, "what are you aiming at?" "Two
miles from here," answered he, "there sits a fly on the bough of an
oak tree, I mean to put a bullet into its left eye." "Oh, come along
with me," said the leader; "three of us together can stand against
the world." The huntsman was quite willing to go with him, and so they
went on till they came to seven windmills, whose sails were going
round briskly, and yet there was no wind blowing from any quar- ter, and not a leaf stirred.
"Well," said the leader, "I cannot think what ails the windmills,
turning without wind"; and he went on with his followers about two miles farther, and then they came to a man sitting up in a tree,
holding one nostril and blowing with the other.
"Now then," said the leader, "what are you doing up there?"
"Two miles from here," answered he, "there are seven windmills; I
am blowing, and they are going round." "Oh, go with me," cried
the leader, "foiu* of us together can stand against the world."
350 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
So the blower got down and went with them, and after a time
they came to a man standing on one leg, and the other had been
taken off and was lying near him.
''You seem to have got a handy way of resting yourself," said the
leader to the man. "I am a runner," answered he, "and in order to keep myself from going too fast I have taken off a leg, for when I
run with both, I go faster than a bird can fly." "Oh, go with me,"
cried the leader, "five of us together may well stand against the
world." So he went with them all together, and it was not long before
they met a man with a little hat on, and he wore it just over one
ear.
"Mannersl mannersl" said the leader; "with your hat like that,
you look like a jack-fool." "I dare not put it straight," answered the
other; "if I did, there would be such a terrible frost that the very
birds would be frozen and fall dead from the sky to the ground."
"Oh, come with me," said the leader; "we six together may well
stand against the whole world." So the six went on until they came to a town where the King
had caused it to be made known that whoever would run a race
with his daughter and win it might become her husband, but that
whoever lost must lose his head into the bargain. And the leader
came forward and said one of his men should run for him.
"Then," said the King, "his Ufe too must be put in pledge, and if
he fails, his head and yours too must fall." When this was quite settled and agreed upon, the leader called
the runner, and strapped his second leg on to him. "Now, look out,"
said he, "and take care that we win." It had been agreed that the one who should bring water first from a far distant brook should be accounted winner. Now the
King's daughter and the runner each took a pitcher, and they
started both at the same time; but in one moment, when the King's daughter had gone but a very Httle way, the runner was out of
sight, for his running was as if the wind rushed by. In a short time
he reached the brook, filled his pitcher full of water, and turned
back again. About half-way home, however, he was overcome with
weariness, and setting down his pitcher, he lay down on the ground
to sleep. But in order to awaken soon again by not lying too soft
he had taken a horse's skull which lay near and placed it under his
head for a pillow. In the meanwhile the King's daughter, who really was a good runner, good enough to beat an ordinary man, had
Six Soldiers of Fortune 351
reached the brook, and filled her pitcher, and was hastening with it
back again, when she saw the runner lying asleep.
"The day is mine," said she with much joy, and she emptied his pitcher and hastened on. And now all had been lost but for the
huntsman who was standing on the castle wall, and with his keen
eyes saw all that happened.
"We must not be outdone by the King's daughter," said he, and
he loaded his rifle and took so good an aim that he shot the horse's
skull from under the runner's head without doing him any harm. And the rmmer awoke and jumped up, and saw his pitcher standing empty and the King's daughter far on her way home. But, not losing courage, he ran swiftly to the brook, filled it again with
water, and for all that, he got home ten minutes before the King's daughter.
"Look you," said he; "this is the first time I have really stretched
my legs; before it was not worth the name of running." The King was vexed, and his daughter yet more so, that she
should be beaten by a discharged common soldier; and they took
counsel together how they might rid themselves of him and of his
companions at the same time.
"I have a plan," said the King; "do not fear but that we shall be
quit of them forever." Then he went out to the men and bade them to feast and be merry and eat and drink; and he led them into a
room, which had a floor of iron, and the doors were iron, the win- dows had iron frames and bolts; in the room was a table set out
with costly food. "Now, go in there and make yourselves comfortable," said the King. And when they had gone in, he had the door locked and bolted.
Then he called the cook, and told him to make a big fire underneath the room, so that the iron floor of it should be red hot. And
the cook did so, and the six men began to feel the room growing
very warm, by reason, as they thought at first, of the good dinner;
but as the heat grew greater and greater, and they foimd the doors
and windows fastened, they began to think it was an evil plan of
the King's to suffocate them.
"He shall not succeed, however," said the man with the little hat;
"I will bring on a frost that shall make the fire feel ashamed of itself, and creep out of the way." So he set his hat straight on his head, and immediately there
came such a frost that all the heat passed away and the food froze
in the dishes. After an hour or two had passed, and the King
thought they must have all perished in the heat, he caused the door
352 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
to be opened, and went himself to see how they fared. And when
the door flew back, there they were all six quite safe and sound,
and they said they were quite ready to come out, so that they might
warm themselves, for the great cold of that room had caused the food to freeze in the dishes.
Full of wrath, the King went to the cook and scolded him, and
asked why he had not done as he was ordered. "It is hot enough
there, you may see for yourself," answered the cook. And the King looked and saw an immense fire burning underneath the room of
iron, and he began to think that the six men were not to be got rid
of in that way. And he thought of a new plan by which it might be
managed, so he sent for the leader and said to him, "If you wiU give up your right to my daughter, and take gold instead, you may
have as much as you like."
"Certainly, my lord King," answered the man; "let me have as much gold as my servant can carry, and I give up all claim to your
daughter." And the King agreed that he should come again in a fortnight to fetch the gold. The man then called together all the tailors in the kingdom, and set them to work to make a sack, and it
took them a fortnight. And when it was ready, the strong man who
had been found rooting up trees took it on his shoulder, and went
to the King.
"Who is this immense fellow carrying on his shoulder a bundle
of stuff as big as a house?" cried the King, terrified to think how much gold he would carry off. And a ton of gold was dragged in by
sixteen strong men, but he put it all into the sack with one hand,
saying, "Why don't you bring some more? this hardly covers the
bottom!" So the King bade them fetch by degrees the whole of his treasure, and even then the sack was not half full.
"Bring morel" cried the man; "these few scraps go no way at
all!" Then at last seven thousand wagons laden with gold collected through the whole kingdom were driven up; and he threw them in
his sack, oxen and all. "I wiU not look too closely," said he, "but
take what I can get, so long as the sack is full." And when all was
put in there was still plenty of room. "I must make an end of this,"
he said; "if it is not full, it is so much the easier to tie up." And he hoisted it on his back, and went off with his comrades.
When the King saw all the wealth of his reahn carried off by a
single man he was full of wrath, and he bade his cavalry mount and
follow after the six men, and take the sack away from the strong
man. Two regiments were soon up to them, and called them to con-
The Two Travelers 353
sider themselves prisoners, and to deliver up the sack, or be cut in
pieces.
"Prisoners, say you?" said the man who could blow, "suppose
you first have a little dance together in the air," and holding one nostril, and blowing through the other, he sent the regiments flying
head over heels, over the hills and far away. But a sergeant who
had nine wounds and was a brave fellow, begged not to be put to
so much shame. And the blower let him down easily, so that he
came to no harm, and he bade him go to the King and tell him that
whatever regiments he liked to send more should be blown away
just the same. And the King, when he got the message, said, "Let
the fellows be; they have some right on their side." So the six com- rades carried home their treasure, divided it among them, and Hved
contented till they died.
The Two Travelers
A SHOEMAKER and'k tailor once met with each other in their travels. The tailor was a handsome httle fellow who was always merry and
full of enjoyment. He saw the shoemaker coming towards him from
the other side, and as he observed by his bag what kind of a trade
he plied, he sang a little mocking song to him:
"Sew me the seam. Draw me the thread.
Spread it over with pitch.
Knock the nail on the head."
The shoemaker, however, could not endure a joke. He pulled a
face as if he had drunk vinegar, and made a gesture as if he were
about to seize the tailor by the throat. But the httle feUow began to
laugh, reached him his bottle, and said, "No harm was meant, take
a drink, and swallow thy anger down." The shoemaker took a very hearty drink, and the storm on his face began to clear away. He
gave the bottle back to the tailor, and said, "I spoke civilly to thee; one speaks well after much drinking, but not after much thirst.
Shall we travel together?" "All right," answered the tailor, "if only
it suits thee to go into a big town where there is no lack of work."
"That is just where I want to go," answered the shoemaker. "In a
354 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
small nest there is nothing to earn, and in the country, people like
to go barefoot." They traveled therefore onwards together, and al- ways set one foot before the other like a weasel in the snow.
Both of them had time enough, but httle to bite and to break.
When they reached a town they went about and paid their respects
to the tradesmen, and because the tailor looked so lively and merry,
and had such pretty red cheeks, every one gave him work wiUingly,
and when luck was good the master's daughters gave him a Idss be- neath the porch, as well. When he again fell in with the shoemaker,
the tailor had always the most in his bimdle. The ill-tempered shoemaker made a wry face, and thought, "The greater the rascal the
more the luck," but the tailor began to laugh and to sing, and shared aU he got with his comrade. If a couple of pence jingled in
his pockets, he ordered good cheer, and thumped the table in his
joy till the glasses danced, and it was lightly come, Hghtly go, with him.
When they had traveled for some time, they came to a great forest through which passed the road to the capital. Two footpaths,
however, led through it, one of which was a seven days' journey, and the other only two, but neither of the travelers knew which
way was the short one. They seated themselves beneath an oak
tree, and took counsel together how they should forecast, and for
how many days they should provide themselves with bread. The
shoemaker said, "One must look before one leaps, I will take with
me bread for a week." "Whatl" said the tailor, "drag bread for
seven days on one's back like a beast of burden, and not be able to look about. I shall trust in God, and not trouble myself about anything! The money I have in my pocket is as good in summer as in
winter, but in hot weather bread gets dry, and moldy into the bargain; even my coat does not go as far as it might. Besides, why
should we not find the right way? Bread for two days, and that's
enough." Each, therefore, bought his own bread, and then they tried their luck in the forest.
It was as quiet there as in a church. No wind stirred, no brook
murmured, no bird sang, and through the thickly leaved branches
no sunbeam forced its way. The shoemaker spoke never a word, the
heavy bread weighed down his back until the perspiration
streamed down his cross and gloomy face. The tailor, however, was
quite merry, he jumped about, whistled on a leaf, or sang a song,
and thought to himself, "God in Heaven must be pleased to see me
so happy." This lasted two days, but on the third the forest would not come
The Two Travelers 355
to an end, and the tailor had eaten up all his bread, so after all his
heart sank down a yard deeper. In the meantime he did not lose
corn-age, but relied on God and on his luck. On the third day he lay down in the evening, hungry, under a tree, and rose again next
morning hungry still; so also passed the fourth day, and when the
shoemaker seated himself on a fallen tree and devoured his dinner,
the tailor was only a looker-on. If he begged for a little piece of
bread the other laughed mockingly, and said, "Thou hast always been so merry, now thou canst try for once what it is to be sad: the
birds which sing too early in the morning are struck by the hawk in
the evening," in short he was pitiless. But on the fifth morning the poor tailor could no longer stand up, and was hardly able to utter
one word for weakness; his cheeks were white, and his eyes red.
Then the shoemaker said to him, "I will give thee a bit of bread
today, but in return for it, I will put out thy right eye." The un- happy tailor who still wished to save his Ufe, could not do it in any
other way; he wept once more with both eyes, and then held them
out, and the shoemaker, who had a heart of stone, put out his right
eye with a sharp knife. The tailor remembered what his mother had
formerly said to him when he had been eating secretly in the pantry. "Eat what one can, and suffer what one must." When he had consumed his dearly bought bread, he got on his
legs again, forgot his misery and comforted himself with the
thought that he could always see enough with one eye. But on the
sixth day, hunger made itself felt again, and gnawed him almost to
the heart. In the evening he fell down by a tree, and on the seventh
morning he could not raise himself up for faintness, and death was
close at hand. Then said the shoemaker, "1 will show mercy and give thee bread once more, but thou shalt not have it for nothing, I
shall put out thy other eye for it." And now the tailor felt how thoughtless his life had been, prayed
to God for forgiveness, and said, "Do what thou wilt, I will bear what I must, but remember that our Lord God does not always
look on passively, and that an hour wiU come when the evil deed
which thou hast done to me, and which I have not deserved of
thee, will be requited. When times were good with me, I shared
what I had with thee. My trade is of that kind that each stitch must
always be exactly like the other. If I no longer have my eyes and
can sew no more I must go a-begging. At any rate do not leave me
here alone when I am bUnd, or I shall die of hunger." The shoe- maker, however, who had driven God out of his heart, took the
356 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
knife and put out his left eye. Then he gave him a bit of bread to
eat, held out a stick to him, and drew him on behind him.
When the sun went down, they got out of the forest, and before
them in the open country stood the gallows. Thither the shoemaker
guided the blind tailor, and then left him alone and went his way.
Weariness, pain, and hunger made the wretched man fall asleep,
and he slept the whole night. When day dawned he awoke, but
knew not where he lay. Two poor sinners were hanging on the gal- lows, and a crow sat on the head of each of them. Then one of the
men who had been hanged began to speak, and said, "Brother, art
thou awake?" "Yes, I am awake," answered the second. "Then I
will tell thee something," said the first; "the dew which this night has fallen down over us from the gallows, gives every one who
washes himself with it his eyes again. If bHnd people did but know
this how many would regain their sight who do not believe that to
be possible." When the tailor heard that, he took his pocket-handkerchief,
pressed it on the grass, and when it was moist with dew, washed
the sockets of his eyes with it. Immediately was fulfilled what the
man on the gallows had said, and a couple of healthy new eyes
filled the sockets. It was not long before the tailor saw the sun rise
behind the mountains; in the plain before him lay the great royal
city with its magnificent gates and hundred towers, and the golden
balk and crosses which were on the spires began to shine. He could
distinguish every leaf on the trees, saw the birds which flew past,
and the midges which danced in the air. He took a needle out of
his pocket, and as he could thread it as well as ever he had done,
his heart danced with delight. He threw himself on his knees,
thanked God for the mercy he had shown him, and said his morning prayer. He did not forget also to pray for the poor sinners who
were hanging there swinging against each other in the wind like
the pendulums of clocks. Then he took his bundle on his back and
soon forgot the pain of heart he had endured, and went on his way
singing and whistling.
The fijrst thing he met was a brown foal running about the fields
at large. He caught it by the mane, and wanted to spring on it and
ride into the town. The foal, however, begged to be set free. "I am
still too young," it said, "even a light tailor such as thou art would break my back in two— let me go till I have grown strong. A time
may perhaps come when I may reward thee for it." "Run off," said
the tailor, "I see thou art stiU a giddy thing." He gave it a touch with a switch over its back, whereupon it kicked up its hind legs for
The Two Travelers 357
joy, leapt over hedges and ditches, and galloped away, far out into
the open country.
But the little tailor had eaten nothing since the day before. "The
sun to be sure fills my eyes," said he, "but the bread does not fill my mouth. The first thing that comes across me and is even half
eatable will have to suffer for it." In the meantime a stork stepped
solemnly over the meadow towards him. "Halt, halt!" cried the tailor, and seized him by the leg; '1 don't know if thou art good to eat or not, but my hunger leaves me no great choice. I must cut thy
head off, and roast thee." 'T)on't do that," repKed the stork; "I am a sacred bird which brings mankind great profit, and no one does me
an injury. Leave me my Hfe, and I may do thee good in some other
way." 'Well, be off. Cousin Longlegs," said the tailor. The stork rose up, let its long legs hang down, and flew gently away.
"What's to be the end of this?" said the tailor to himself at last,
"my himger grows greater and greater, and my stomach more and
more empty. Whatsoever comes in my way now is lost." At this mo- ment he saw a couple of young ducks which were on a pond come
swimming towards him. "You come just at the right moment," said he, and laid hold of one of them and was about to wring its neck.
On this an old duck which was hidden among the reeds, began to
scream loudly, and swam to him with open beak, and begged him
urgently to spare her dear children. "Canst thou not imagine," said
she, "how thy mother would mourn if any one wanted to carry thee
off, and give thee thy finishing stroke?" "Only be qmet," said the
good-tempered tailor, "thou shalt keep thy children," and put the prisoner back into the water.
When he turned round, he was standing in front of an old tree
which was partly hollow, and saw some wild bees flying in and out
of it. "There I shall at once find the reward of my good deed," said
the tailor, "the honey will refresh me." But the Queen-bee came
out, threatened him and said, "If thou touchest my people, and de- stroyeth my nest, our stings shall pierce thy sldn like ten thousand
red-hot needles. But if thou wilt leave us in peace and go thy way,
we will do thee a service for it another time." The Httle tailor saw that here also nothing was to be done.
"Three dishes empty and nothing on the fourth is a bad dinnerl" He dragged himseff therefore with his starved-out stomach into the
town, and as it was just striking twelve, all was ready-cooked for him in the inn, and he was able to sit down at once to dinner.
When he was satisfied he said, "Now I will get to work." He went round the town, sought a master, and soon found a good situation.
358 GrimrrCs Complete Fairy Tales
As, however, he had thoroughly learnt his trade, it was not long
before he became famous, and every one wanted to have his new
coat made by the little tailor, whose importance increased daily. 1
can go no further in sldll," said he, "and yet things improve every
day." At last the King appointed him court-tailor. But how things do happen in the worldl On the very same day
his former comrade, the shoemaker, also became court-shoemaker.
When the latter caught sight of the tailor, and saw that he had once
more two healthy eyes, his conscience troubled him. "Before he
takes revenge on me," thought he to himself, "I must dig a pit for
him." He, however, who digs a pit for another, falls into it himself. In the evening when work was over and it had grown dusk, he stole
to the King and said, 'Xord King, the tailor is an arrogant fellow and has boasted that he will get the gold crown back again which
was lost in ancient times." "That would please me very much," said the King, and he caused the tailor to be brought before him next
morning, and ordered him to get the crown back again, or to leave
the town forever. "Ohol" thought the tailor, "a rogue gives more than he has got. If the surly King wants me to do what can be done
by no one, I will not wait till morning, but wiH go out of the town
at once, today." He packed up his bimdle, therefore, but when he was without
the gate he could not help being sorry to give up his good fortune,
and turn his back on the town in which all had gone so well with
him. He came to the pond where he had made the acquaintance of
the ducks; at that very moment the old one whose yoimg ones he
had spared, was sitting there by the shore, pluming herself with her
beak. She knew him again instantly, and asked why he was hanging
his head so. "Thou wilt not be surprised when thou hearest what
has befallen me," replied the tailor, and told her his fate. "If that
be aU," said the duck, "we can help thee. The crown fell into the water, and lies down below at the bottom; we will soon bring it up
again for thee. In the meantime just spread out thy handkerchief on
the bank." She dived down with her twelve young ones, and in five minutes she was up again and sat with the crown resting on her
wings, and the twelve young ones were swimming round about and
had put their beaks under it, and were helping to carry it. They
swam to the shore and put the crown on the handkerchief. No one
can imagine how magnificent the crown was; when the sun shone
on it, it gleamed Hke a hundred thousand carbuncles. The tailor
tied his handkerchief together by the foiu: comers, and carried it to
The Two Travelers 359
the King, who was full of joy, and put a gold chain round the tailor's neck. When the shoemaker saw that one stroke had failed, he contrived
a second, and went to the King and said, 'Xord King, the tailor has become insolent again; he boasts that he will copy in wax the
whole of the royal palace, with everything that pertains to it, loose
or fast, inside and out." The King sent for the tailor and ordered him to copy in wax the whole of the royal palace, with everything that
pertained to it, movable or inuiiovable, within and without, and if
he did not succeed in doing this, if so much as one nail on the wall
were wanting, he should be imprisoned for his whole life under
groimd.
The tailor thought, 'It gets worse and worse! No one can endure
thatl" and threw his bundle on his back, and went forth. When he came to the hollow tree, he sat down and hung his head. The bees
came flying out, and the Queen-bee asked him if he had a stiff
neck, since he held his head so awry. "Alas, no," answered the tailor, "something quite different weighs me down," and he told her what the King had demanded of him. The bees began to buzz and
hum among themselves, and the Queen-bee said, "Just go home again, but come back tomorrow at this time, and bring a large sheet
vidth thee, and then all will be well." So he turned back again, but the bees flew to the royal palace and straight into it through the
open windows, crept round about into every comer, and inspected
everything most carefully. Then they hurried back and modeled the
palace in wax with such rapidity that any one looking on would
have thought it was growing before his eyes. By the evening all was
ready, and when the tailor came next morning, the whole of the
splendid building was there, and not one nail in the wall or tile of
the roof was wanting, and it was delicate withal, and white as
snow, and smelt sweet as honey. The tailor wrapped it carefully in
his cloth and took it to the King, who could not admire it enough,
placed it in his largest haU, and in return for it presented the tailor
with a large stone house.
The shoemaker, however, did not give up, but went for the third
time to the King and said, "Lord King, it has come to the tailor's ears that no water will spring up in the court-yard of the castle, and
he has boasted that it shall rise up in the midst of the court-yard to
a man's height and be clear as crystal." Then the King ordered the
tailor to be brought before him and said, "If a stream of water does not rise in my court-yard by tomorrow as thou hast promised, the
executioner shall in that very place make thee shorter by the head."
360 Grimm*s Complete Fairy Tales
The poor tailor did not take long to think about it, but hiuried
out to the gate, and because this time it was a matter of life and
death to him, tears rolled down his face. While he was thus going
forth fuU of sorrow, the foal to which he had formerly given its
Hberty, and which had now become a beautiful chestnut horse,
came leaping towards him. "The time has come," it said to the tailor, "when I can repay thee for thy good deed. I know already what is needful to thee, but thou shalt soon have help; get on me,
my back can carry two such as thou." The tailor's courage came back to him; he jiunped up in one bound, and the horse went full
speed into the town, and right up to the court-yard of the castle. It
galloped as quick as lightning thrice round it, and at the third time
it fell violently down. At the same instant, however, there was a
terrific clap of thunder, a fragment of earth in the middle of the
comt-yard sprang like a cannon-ball into the air, and over the castle, and directly after it a jet of water rose as high as a man on
horseback, and the water was as pure as crystal, and the sunbeams
began to dance on it. When the King saw that he arose in amazement, and went and embraced the tailor in the sight of aU men.
But good fortune did not last long. The King had daughters in
plenty, one prettier than the other, but he had no son. So the mali- cious shoemaker betook himself for the fourth time to the King, and
said, *Xord King, the tailor has not given up his arrogance. He has now boasted that if he liked, he could cause a son to be brought to
the Lord King through the air." The King commanded the tailor to
be summoned, and said, *Tf thou causest a son to be brought to me
within nine days, thou shalt have my eldest daughter to wife."
"The reward is indeed great," thought the little tailor; "one would willingly do something for it, but the cherries grow too high for me,
if I cHmb for them, the bough will break beneath me, and I shall
faU." He went home, seated himself cross-legged on his work-table,
and thought what was to be done. "It can't be managed," cried he
at last, "I will go away; after all I can't live in peace here." He tied up his bundle and hurried away to the gate. When he got to the
meadow, he perceived his old friend the stork, who was walking
backwards and forwards like a philosopher. Sometimes he stood
still, took a frog into close consideration, and at length swallowed it
down. The stork came to him and greeted him. "I see," he began,
"that thou hast thy pack on thy back. Why art thou leaving the
town?" The tailor told him what the King had required of him, and
how he could not perform it, and lamented his misfortune. "Don't
The Ear of Corn 361
let thy hair grow gray about that," said the stork, '1 will help thee out of thy diflBculty. For a long time now, I have carried the children in swaddling-clothes into the town, so for once in a way I can
fetch a little Prince out of the well. Go home and be easy. In nine
days from this time repair to the royal palace, and there will I
come." The httle tailor went home, and at the appointed time was at the
castle. It was not long before the stork came flying thither and
tapped at the window. The tailor opened it, and Cousin Longlegs
came carefully in, and walked with solenm steps over the smooth
marble pavement He had, however, a baby in his beak that was as
lovely as an angel, and stretched out its little hands to the Queen.
The stork laid it in her lap, and she caressed it and kissed it, and
was beside herself with dehght. Before the stork flew away, he took
his traveling bag off his back and handed it over to the Queen. In it
there were little paper parcels with colored sweetmeats, and they
were divided among the httle Princesses. The eldest, however, had
none of them, but got the merry tailor for a husband. "It seems to
me," said he, "just as if I had won the highest prize. My mother was right after all, she always said that whoever trusts in God and
only has good luck, can never fail." The shoemaker had to make the shoes in which the Httle tailor
danced at the wedding festival, after which he was commanded to
quit the town forever. The road to the forest led him to the gallows.
Worn out with anger, rage, and the heat of the day, he threw himself down. When he had closed his eyes and was about to sleep, the
two crows flew down from the heads of the men who were hanging
there, and pecked his eyes out. In his madness he ran into the forest
and must have died there of hunger, for no one has ever either seen
him again or heard of him.
The Ear of Corn
In former times, when God himself still walked the earth, the
fruitfulness of the soil was much greater than it is now; then, the
ears of com did not bear fifty or sixty, but foiu- or five hundred- fold. Then the com grew from the bottom to the very top of the
stalk, and according to the length of the stalk was the length of the
362 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
ear. Men however are so made, that when they are too well oflE they
no longer value the blessings which come from God, but grow indifferent and careless.
One day a woman was passing by a corn-field when her little
child, who was running beside her, fell into a puddle, and dirtied
her frock. On this the mother tore up a handful of the beautiful
ears of com, and cleaned the frock with them.
When the Lord, who just then came by, saw that, he was angry,
and said, "Henceforth shall the stalks of com bear no more ears;
men are no longer worthy of heavenly gifts." The by-standers who heard this, were terrified, and fell on their knees and prayed that he
would still leave something on the stalks, even if the people were
undeserving of it, for the sake of the innocent birds which would
otherwise have to starve. The Lord, who foresaw their suffering,
had pity on them, and granted the request. So the ears were left as
they now grow.
The Aged Mother
In a large town there was an old woman who sat in the evening
alone in her room thinking how she had lost Gist her husband, then
both her children, then, one by one, all her relations, and at length,
that very day, her last friend; and now she was quite alone and desolate. She was very sad at heart, and heaviest of aU her losses to her
was that of her sons, and in her pain she blamed God for it.
She was Still sitting lost in thought, when all at once she heard
the bells ringing for early prayer. She was surprised that she had
thus in her sorrow watched through the whole night, and lighted
her lantern and went to chiu-ch. It was already Ughted up when she arrived, but not as it usually was with wax candles, but with a dim
light. It was also crowded already with people, and all the seats
were filled; and when the old woman got to her usual place it also
was not empty, but the whole bench was entirely fuU. And when
she looked at the people, they were none other than her dead relations who were sitting there in their old-fashioned garments, but
with pale faces. They neither spoke nor sang; but a soft himiming
and whispering was heard all over the church. Then an aunt of hers
The Hazel Branch 363
stood up, stepped forward, and said to the poor old woman, *Xook
there beside the altar, and you will see your sons." The old woman looked there and saw her two children, one hanging on the gallows,
the other bound to the wheel. Then sEiid the aunt, "Behold, so would it have been with them if they had Uved, and if the good
God had not taken them to Himself when they were innocent children." The old woman went trembhng home, and on her knees thanked
God for having dealt with her more kindly than she had been able
to understand, and on the third day she lay down and died.
The Hazel Branch
One afternoon the Christ-child had laid himself in his cradle-bed
and had fallen asleep. Then his mother came to him, looked at him
full of gladness, and said, "Hast thou laid thyself down to sleep, my child? Sleep sweetly, and in the meantime I v^ill go into the
wood, and fetch thee a handful of strawberries, for I know that
thou wilt be pleased with them when thou awakest." In the wood outside, she found a spot with the most beautiful strawberries; but
as she was stooping down to gather one, an adder sprang up out of
the grass. She was alarmed, left the strawberries where they were,
and hastened away. The adder darted after her; but Our Lady, as
you can readily understand, knew what it was best to do. She hid
herself behind a hazel bush, and stood there imtil the adder had
crept away again. Then she gathered the strawberries, and as she
set out on her way home she said, "As the hazel bush has been my
protection this time, it shall in futLue protect others also." There- fore, from the most remote times, a green hazel branch has been
the safest protection against adders, snakes, and everything else
which creeps on the earth.
The Old Grandfather's Corner
Once upon a time there was a very old man who lived with his son
and daughter-in-law. His eyes were dim, his knees tottered under
him when he walked, and he was very deaf. As he sat at table his
hand shook so that he would often spill the soup over the table- cloth or on his clothes, and sometimes he could not even keep it in
his mouth when it got there. His son and daughter were so annoyed
to see his conduct at the table that at last they placed a chair for
him in a corner behind the screen, and gave him his meals in an
earthenware basin quite away from the rest. He would often look
sorrowfully at the table with tears in his eyes, but he did not complain.
One day, while he was thinking sadly of the past, the earthenware basin, which he could scarcely hold in his trembling hands,
fell to the ground and was broken. The young wife scolded him
well for being so careless, but he did not reply, only sighed deeply.
Then she bought him a wooden bowl for a penny and gave him his meals in it.
Some days afterward his son and daughter saw their Httle boy,
who was about four years old, sitting on the ground and trying to
fasten together some pieces of wood.
'^What are you making, my boy?" asked his father.
"I am making a little bowl for papa and mamma to eat their food
in when I grow up," he replied. The husband and wife looked at each other without speaking for
some minutes. At last they began to shed tears, and went and
brought their old father back to the table, and from that day he al- ways took his meals with them and was never again treated
unkindly.
The Ungrateful Son
A MAN and his wife were once sitting by the door of their house,
and they had a roasted chicken set before them, and were about to
The Bittern and the Hoopoe 365
eat it together. Then the man saw that his aged father was coming,
and hastily took the chicken and hid it, for he would not permit
him to have any of it. The old man came, took a drink, and went
away. The son wanted to put the roasted chicken on the table
again, but when he took it up, it had become a great toad, which
jumped into his face and sat there and never went away again, and
if any one wanted to take it ofiF, it looked venomously at him as if it
would jump in his face, so that no one would venture to touch it.
And the ungrateful son was forced to feed the toad every day, or
else it fed itself on his face; and thus he went about the world without knowing rest.
The Bittern and the Hoopoe
"Whebe do you like best to feed your flocks?" said a man to an old
cow-herd. "Here, sir, where the grass is neither too rich nor too
poor, or else it is no use." "Why not?" asked the man. "Do you hear
that melancholy cry from the meadow there?" answered the shepherd, "that is the bittern; he was once a shepherd, and so was the hoopoe also— I will tell you the story.
"The bittern pastured his flocks on rich green meadows where flowers grew in abundance, so his cows became wild and unmanageable. The hoopoe drove his cattle on to high barren hills,
where the vwnd plays with the sand, and his cows became thin, and
got no strength. When it was evening, and the shepherds wanted to
drive their cows homewards, the bittern could not get his together
again; they were too high-spirited, and ran away from him. He
called, 'Come, cows, come,' but it was of no use; they took no notice of his calling. The hoopoe, however, could not even get his cows up
on their legs, so faint and weak had they become. 'Up, up, up,' screamed he, but it was in vain, they remained lying on the sand.
That is the way when one has no moderation. And to this day,
though they have no flocks now to watch, the bittern cries, 'Come,
cows, come'; and the hoopoe, 'Up, up, up."
The Three Languages
In Switzerland there lived an old count, who had an only son, a
boy who was so stupid he never learned anything. One day the father said, "My son, listen to what I have to say; do all I may, I can knock nothing into yoinr head. Now you shall go away, and an eminent master shall try his hand with you." So the youth was sent to a foreign city, and remained a whole
year with his master, and at the end of that time he returned home.
His father asked him at once what he had learned, and he repHed,
"My father, I have learned what the dogs bark."
"Heavens!" exclaimed the father, "is this all you have learned? I
will send you to some other city, to another master." So the youth went away a second time, and after he had remained a year with
this master, came home again. His father asked him, as before,
what he had learned, and he replied, "I have learned what the
birds sing." This answer put the father in a passion, and he exclaimed, "Oh, you prodigal! Has all this precious time passed, and have you learned nothing? Are you not ashamed to come into my
presence? Once more, I will send you to a third master; but if you
learn nothing this time I will no longer be a father to you." With this third master the boy remained, as before, a twelve- month; and when he came back to his father, he told him that he
had learned the language that the frogs croak. At this the father
flew into a great rage, and, calling his people together, said, "This youth is no longer my son; I cast him off, and command that you
lead him into the forest and take away his life." The servants led him away into the forest, but they had not the
heart to kill him, so they let him go. They cut out, however, the
eyes and the tongue of a fawn, and took them for a token to the old count.
The young man wandered along, and after some time came to a
castle, where he asked for a night's lodging. The lord of the castle
said, "Yes, if you will sleep down below. There is the tower; you may go, but I warn you it is very perilous, for it is full of wild dogs,
which bark and howl at every one, and, at certain hours, a man
must be thrown to them, whom they devour." Now, on account of these dogs the whole country round was in
The Three Languages 367
terror and sorrow, for no one could prevent their ravages; but the
youth, being afraid of nothing, said, "Only let me in to these bark- ing hounds, and give me something to throw to them; they will not
harm me." Since he himself wished it, they gave him some meat for the wild
hounds, and let him into the tower. As soon as he entered, the dogs
ran about him quite in a friendly way, wagging their tails, and
never once barking. They ate, also, the meat he brought, and did
not attempt to do him the least injury. The next morning, to the astonishment of every one, he came forth unharmed, and told the
lord of the castle, "The hounds have informed me, in their lan- guage, why they thus waste and bring destruction upon the land.
They have the guardianship of a large treasiu^e beneath the tower, and tiU that is raised, they have no rest. In what way and manner
this is to be done I have also understood from them." At these words every one began rejoicing, and the lord promised
him his daughter in marriage, if he could raise the treasure. This
task he happily accomplished, and the wild hounds thereupon dis- appeared, and the country was freed from that plague. Then the
beautiful maiden was married to him, and they lived happily together.
After some time, he one day got into a carriage with his wife and
set out on the road to Rome. On their way thither, they passed a
swamp, where the frogs sat croaking. The young count listened,
and when he heard what they said, he became quite thoughtful and
sad, but he did not teU his wife the reason. At last they arrived at
Rome, and found the Pope was just dead, and there was a great
contention among the cardinals as to who should be his successor.
They at length resolved, that he on whom some miraculous sign
should be shown should be elected. Just as they had thus resolved,
at the same moment the young count stepped into the church, and
suddenly two snow-white Doves flew down, one on each of his
shoulders, and remained perched there. The clergy recognized in
this circumstance the sign they required, and asked him on the spot
whether he would be Pope. The young count was undecided, and
knew not whether he were worthy; but the Doves whispered to him
that he might take the honor, and so he consented. Then he was
anointed and consecrated; and so was fulfilled what the frogs had
prophesied— and which had so disturbed him— that he should be- come Pope. Upon his election he had to sing a mass, of which he
knew nothing; but the two Doves sitting upon his shoulder told him
all that was required.
The Star Money
There was once on a time a little girl whose father and mother
were dead, and she was so poor that she no longer had any Httle
room to live in, or bed to sleep in, and at last she had nothing else
but the clothes she was wearing and a little bit of bread in her
hand which some charitable soul had given her. She was, however,
good and pious. And as she was thus forsaken by all the world, she
went forth into the open country, trusting in the good God.
Then a poor man met her, who said, "Ah, give me something to
eat, I am so hungry!" She reached him the whole of her piece of
bread, and said, "May God bless it to your use," and went onwards.
Then came a child who moaned and said, "My head is so cold, give
me something to cover it with." So she took o£E her hood and gave it to him. And when she had walked a little farther, she met another
child who had no jacket and was frozen with cold so she gave it her
own. A little farther on one begged for a frock, and she gave away
that also. At length she got into a forest and it had already become
dark, and there came yet another child, and asked for a little shirt,
and the good little girl thought to herself, "It is a dark night and no
one sees you, you can very well give yoiu: little shirt away"; and took it oflF, and gave away that also.
And as she so stood, and had not one single thing left, suddenly
some stars from heaven fell down, and they were nothing else but
hard, smooth pieces of money, and although she had just given her
little shirt away, she had a new one which was of the very finest
linen. Then she gathered together the money, put it into the shirt
and was rich all the days of her life.
The Poor Man and the Rich Man
In ancient times, when the Lord God himself still used to walk
about on this earth among men, it once happened that He was tired
and overtaken by the darkness before He could reach an inn. Now
The Poor Man and the Rich Man 369
there stood on the road before Him two houses facing each other;
the one large and beautiful, the other small and poor. The large one
belonged to a rich man, and the small one to a poor man.
Then the Lord thought, "1 shall be no burden to the rich man, I
will stay the night with him." When the rich man heard some one knocking at his door, he opened the window and asked the stranger
what he wanted. The Lord answered, "I only ask for a night's
lodging." Then the rich man looked at the traveler from head to foot, and as
the Lord was wearing common clothes, and did not look like one
who had much money in his pocket, he shook his head, and said,
"No, I cannot take you in, my rooms are full of herbs and seeds; and if I were to lodge every one who knocked at my door, I might
very soon go begging myself. Go somewhere else for a lodging." And with this he shut down the window and left the Lord standing there.
So the Lord turned his back on the rich man, and went across to
the small house and knocked. He had hardly done so when the
poor man opened the little door and bade the traveler come in.
"Pass the night with me, it is aheady dark," said he; "you cannot
go any further tonight." This pleased the Lord, and He went in.
The poor man's wife shook hands with Him, and welcomed Him, and said He was to make Himself at home and put up with what
they had; they had not much to offer Him, but what they had they
would give Him with all their hearts. Then she put the potatoes on
the fire, and while they were boiling, she milked the goat, that they
might have a little milk with them. When the cloth was laid, the
Lord sat down with the man and his wife, and He enjoyed their
coarse food, for there were happy faces at the table.
When they had had supper and it was bed-time, the woman
called her husband apart and said, "Hark you, dear husband, let us make up a bed of straw for ourselves tonight, and then the poor
traveler can sleep in our bed and have a good rest, for he has been
walking the whole day through, and that makes one weary." "With
all my heart," he answered. "I will go and offer it to him"; and he went to the stranger and invited him, if he had no objection, to
sleep in their bed and rest his Umbs properly. But the Lord was unwilling to take their bed from the two old folks; however, they
would not be satisfied, until at length He did it and lay down in
their bed, while they themselves lay on some straw on the ground.
Next morning they got up before daybreak, and made as good a
breakfast as they could for the guest. When the sun shone in
370 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
through the little window, and the Lord had got up, He again ate
with them, and then prepared to set out on His jovuTiey.
But as He was standing at the door He turned round and said,
"As you are so land and good, you may wish three things for yourselves and I will grant them." Then the man said, "What else should I wish for but eternal happiness, and that we two, as long as
we live, may be healthy and have every day oiu* daily bread; for
the third wish, I do not know what to have." And the Lord said to
him, "Will you wish for a new house iastead of this old one?" "Oh,
yes," said the man; "if I can have that, too, I should like it very
much." And the Lord fulfilled his wish, and changed their old house into a new one, again gave them His blessing, and went on.
The sun was high when the rich man got up and leaned out of
his window and saw, on the opposite side of the way, a new cleanlooking house with red tiles and bright windows, where the old hut
used to be. He was very much astonished, and called his v^rife and
said to her, "Tell me, what can have happened? Last night there was a miserable Httle hut standing there, and today there is a beautiful new house. Run over and see how that has come to pass." So his wife went and asked the poor man, and he said to her,
"Yesterday evening a traveler came here and asked for a night's lodging, and this morning when he took leave of us he granted us
three vvdshes— eternal happiness, health during this life and our
daily bread as well, and, besides this, a beautiful new house instead
of our old hut."
When the rich man's wife heard this, she ran back in haste and
told her husband how it had happened. The man said, "I could tear myself to pieces! If I had but known that! The traveler came to our
house too, and wanted to sleep here, and I sent him away."
"Quick!" said his wife, "get on your horse. You can still catch the
man up, and then you must ask to have three wishes granted you." The rich man followed the good counsel and galloped away on
his horse, and soon came up with the Lord. He spoke to Him softly
and pleasantly, and begged Him not to take it amiss that he had
not let Him in directly; he had been looking for the front-door key,
and' in the meantime the stranger had gone away; if He returned
the same way He must come and stay with him. "Yes," said the
Lord; "if I ever come back again, I viall do so." Then the rich man asked if he might not wish for three things too, as his neighbor had
done. "Yes," said the Lord, he might, but it would not be to his ad- vantage, and he had better not v^dsh for anything; but the rich man
thought that he could easily ask for something which would add to
The Poor Man and the Rich Man 371
his happiness, if only he knew that it would be granted. So the
Lord said to him, "Ride home, then, and three wishes which you shall form, shall be fulfilled." The rich man had now gained what he wanted, so he rode home,
and began to consider what he should wish for. As he was thus
thinking he let the bridle fall, and the horse began to caper about,
so that he was continually disturbed in his meditations, and could
not collect his thoughts at all. He patted its neck, and said, "Gently,
Lisa," but the horse only began new tricks. Then at last he was
angry, and cried quite impatiently, "I wish your neck was broken!" Directly he had said the words, down the horse fell on the
ground, and there it lay dead and never moved again. And thus
was his first wish fulfilled. As he was miserly by natinre, he did not
like to leave the harness lying there, so he cut it off, and put it on
his back; and now he had to go on foot. "1 have still two wishes
left," said he, and comforted himself with that thought. And now as he was walking slowly through the sand, and the sun
was burning hot at noon-day, he grew quite hot-tempered and
angry. The saddle hurt his back, and he had not yet any idea what to
wish for. "If I were to wish for all the riches and treasures in the
world," said he to himself, "I should still think of all kinds of things besides later on; I know that, beforehand. But I will manage so
that there is nothing at all left me to wish for afterwards." Then
he sighed and said, "Ah, if I were but that Bavarian peasant, who likewise had three wishes granted to him, and knew quite well what
to do, and in the first place wished for a great deal of beer, and
in the second for as much beer as he was able to drink, and in
the third for a barrel of beer into the bargain." Many a time he thought he had found it, but then it seemed to
him to be, after all, too little. Then it came into his mind, what
an easy life his wife had, for she stayed at home in a cool room
and enjoyed herself. This really did vex him, and before he was
aware, he said, "I just wish she was sitting there on this saddle, and could not get off it, instead of my having to drag it along on
my back." And as the last word was spoken, the saddle disappeared from his back, and he saw that his second wish had been fulfilled.
Then he really did feel warm.
He began to run and wanted to be quite alone in his own room
at home, to think of something really large for his last wish. But
when he arrived there and opened the parlor-door, he saw his wife
sitting in the middle of the room on the saddle, crying and complain-
372 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
ing, and quite unable to get off it. So he said, "Do bear it, and I will wish for all the riches on earth for you, only stay where you
are." She, however, called him a fool, and said, "What good wiU all the riches on earth do me, if I am to sit on this saddle? You
have wished me on it, so you must help me off." So whether he would or not, he was forced to let his third wish
be that she should be quit of the saddle, and able to get off it,
and immediately the wish was fulfilled. So he got nothing by it but
vexation, trouble, abuse, and the loss of his horse; but the poor
people lived happily, quietly, and piously until their happy death.
The Stolen Pennies
A FATHER was oue day sitting at dinner with his wife and his chil- dren, and a good friend who had come on a visit was with them.
And as they thus sat, and it was striking twelve o'clock, the stranger saw the door open, and a very pale child dressed ia snow-white clothes came in. It did not look around, and it did not speak, but
went straight into the next room. Soon afterwards it came back, and
went out at the door again in the same quiet manner. On the second
and on the third day, it came also exactly in the same way. At last
the stranger asked the father to whom the beautiful child that went
into the next room every day at noon belonged? "I have never seen
it," said he, neither did he know to whom it could belong. The next day when it again came, the stranger pointed it out to the
father, who however did not see it, and the mother and the children
also all saw nothing.
At this the stranger got up, went to the room door, opened it a
little, and peeped in. Then he saw the child sitting on the ground,
and digging and seeking about industriously among the crevices
between the boards of the floor, but when it saw the stranger, it
disappeared. He now told what he had seen and described the
child exactly, and the mother recognized it, and said, "Ah, it is my
dear child who died a month ago." They took up the boards and found two pennies which the child
had once received from its mother that it might give them to a poor
man. It, however, had thought, *T can buy myself a biscuit for
that," and had kept the pennies, and hidden them in the openings
The Wilful Child 373
between the boards. Therefore it had had no rest in its grave, and
had come every day at noon to seek for these pennies. The parents
gave the money at once to a poor man, and after that the child was
never seen again.
The Shroud
Thebe was once a mother who had a little boy seven years old, who
was so handsome and loveable that no one could look at him without hking him, and she herself worshipped him above everything in
the world. Now it so happened that he suddenly became ill, and
God took him to Himself; and for this the mother could not be
comforted, and wept both day and night. But soon afterwards,
when the child had been buried, it appeared by night in the places
where it had sat and played during its hfe; and if the mother wept,
it wept also, and when morning came it disappeared. As, however,
the mother would not stop crying, it came one night, in the httle
white shroud in which it had been laid in its coflfin, and with its
wreath of flowers round its head, and stood on the bed at her feet,
and said, "Oh, mother, do stop crying, or I shall never fall asleep in my coffin, for my shroud will not dry because of all thy tears, which
fall upon it." The mother was afraid when she heard that, and wept no more. The next night the child came again, and held a little Hght
in its hand, and said, "Look, mother, my shroud is nearly dry, and I
can rest in my grave." Then the mother gave her sorrow into God's keeping, and bore it quietly and patiently, and the child came no
more, but slept in its little bed beneath the earth.
The Wilful Child
Once upon a time there was a child who was wilful, and would not
do what her mother wished. For this reason God had no pleasure in
her, and let her become ill, and no doctor could do her any good,
and in a short time she lay on her death-bed. When she had been
lowered into her grave, and the earth was spread over her, all at
374 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
once her arm came out again, and stretched upwards, and when
they had put it in and spread fresh earth over it, it was all to no
purpose, for the arm always came out again. Then the mother herself was obliged to go to the grave and strike the arm with a rod,
and when she had done that, it was drawn in, and then at last the
child had rest beneath the ground.
The Rose
Thebe was once a poor woman who had two children. The
youngest had to go every day into the forest to fetch wood. Once
when she had gone a long way to seek it, a little child, who was
quite strong, came and helped her industriously to pick up the
wood and carry it home, and then before a moment had passed the
strange child disappeared. The child told her mother this, but at
first she would not believe it. At length she brought a rose home,
and told her mother that the beautiful child had given her this rose,
and had told her that when it was in full bloom, he would retium.
The mother put the rose in water. One morning her child could not
get out of bed. The mother went to the bed and found her dead,
but looking very happy. One the same morning, the rose was in full bloom.
The Tailor in Heaven
One very fine day it came to pass that the good God wished to
enjoy Himself in the heavenly garden, and took all the apostles and
saints with Him, so that no one stayed in heaven but Saint Peter.
The Lord had commanded him to let no one in during His absence,
so Peter stood by the door and kept watch. Before long someone
knocked. Peter asked who was there, and what he wanted.
"I am a poor, honest tailor who prays for admission," replied a smooth voice.
"Honest Indeed," said Peter, "like the thief on the gallows! You
The Tailor in Heaven 375
have been light-fingered and have snipped folks' clothes avv^ay. You will not get into heaven. The Lord has forbidden me to let any one
in while he is out."
"Come, do be merciful," cried the tailor. "Little scraps which fall off the table of their own accord are not stolen, and are not
worth speaking about. Look, I am lame, and have bhsters on my
feet with waUdng here, I carmot possibly turn back again. Only let
me in, and I will do all the rough work. I will carry the children,
and wash their clothes, and wash and clean the benches on which
they have been playing, and patch all their torn clothes." Saint Peter let himself be moved by pity, and opened the door of
heaven just wide enough for the lame tailor to sHp his lean body in.
He was forced to sit down in a comer behind the door, and was to
stay quietly and peaceably there, in order that the Lord, when He
retimaed, might not observe him and be angry.
The tailor obeyed, but once when Saint Peter went outside the
door, he got up, and full of curiosity, went round about into every
corner of heaven, and inspected the arrangement of every place. At
length he came to a spot where many beautiful and dehghtful
chairs were standing, and in the midst was a seat all of gold which
was set with shining jewels; likewise it was much higher than the
other chairs, and a footstool of gold was before it. It was, however,
the seat on which the Lord sat when He was at home, and from
which He could see everything which happened on earth. The tailor stood still, and looked at the seat for a long time, for it pleased
him better than all else. At last he could master his ciuiosity no
longer, and climbed up and seated himself in the chair.
Then he saw everything which was happening on earth, and observed an ugly old woman who was standing washing by the side
of a stream, secretly laying two veils on one side for herself. The
sight of this made the tailor so angry that he laid hold of the golden
footstool, and threw it down to earth through heaven, at the old
thief. As, however, he could not bring the stool back again, he
slipped quietly out of the chair, seated himself in his place behind
the door, and behaved as if he had never stirred from the spot.
When the Lord and Master came back again with His heavenly
companions, He did not see the tailor behind the door, but when
He seated Himself on His chair the footstool was missing. He asked
Saint Peter what had become of the stool, but he did not know.
Then He asked if he had let anyone come in.
"I know of no one who has been here," answered Peter, "but a
lame tailor, who is still sitting behind the door." Then the Lord had
376 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
the tailor brought before Him, and asked him if he had taken away
the stool, and where he had put it.
"Oh, Lord," answered the tailor joyously, "1 threw it in my anger down to earth at an old woman whom I saw stealing two veils at
the washing."
"Oh, you knave," said the Lord, "were I to judge as you judge, how do you think you could have escaped so long? I should long
ago have had no chairs, benches, seats, nay, not even an oven-fork,
but should have thrown everything down at the sinners. Henceforth
you can stay no longer in heaven, but must go outside the door
again. Then go where you will. No one shall give punishment here,
but I alone, the Lord." Peter was obliged to take the tailor out of heaven again, and as
he had torn shoes, and feet covered with blisters, he took a stick in
his hand, and went to the Waitabit inn, where the good soldiers sit
and make merry.
Poverty and Humility Lead to Heaven
There was once a King's son who went out into the world, and he was full of thought and sad. He looked at the sky, which was so
beautifully pure and blue, then he sighed, and said, "How well
must all be with one up there in heaven!" Then he saw a poor gray- haired man who was coming along the road towards him, and he
spoke to him, and asked, "How can I get to heaven?" The man answered, "By poverty and humility. Put on my ragged clothes, wan- der about the world for seven years, and get to know what misery
is, take no money, but if thou art himgry ask compassionate hearts
for a bit of bread; in this way thou wilt reach heaven."
Then the King's son took off his magnificent coat, and wore in its
place the beggar's garment, went out into the wide world, and suffered great misery. He took nothing but a little food, said nothing, but prayed to the Lord to take him into His heaven.
When the seven years were over, he returned to his father's palace, but no one recognized him. He said to the servants, "Go and
tell my parents that I have come back again." But the servants did not believe it, and laughed and left him standing there. Then said
he, "Go and tell it to my brothers that they may come down, for I
The Flail from Heaven 377
should so like to see them again." The servants would not do that
either, but at last one of them went, and told it to the King's chil- dren, but these did not believe it, and did not trouble themselves about it.
Then he MTOte a letter to his mother, and described to her all his
misery, but he did not say that he was her son. So, out of pity, the
Queen had a place under the stairs assigned to him, and food taken
to him daily by two servants. But one of them was ill-natured and
said, "Why should the beggar have the good food?" and kept it for himself, or gave it to the dogs, and took the weak, wasted-away
beggar nothing but water; the other, however, was honest, and took
the beggar what was sent to him. It was Httle, but he could Uve on
it for a while, and all the time he was quite patient, but he grew
continually weaker. As, however, his illness increased, he desired to
receive the last sacrament. When the host was being elevated down
below, all the bells in the town and neighborhood began to ring.
After mass the priest went to the poor man under the stairs, and
there he lay dead. In one hand he had a rose, in the other a Uly,
and beside him was a paper in which was written his history.
When he was buried, a rose grew on one side of his grave, and a
lily on the other.
The Flail from Heaven
A COUNTRYMAN was oncc going out to plough with a pair of oxen.
When he got to the field, both the animals' horns began to grow, and went on growing, and when he wanted to go home they were
so big that the oxen could not get through the gateway for them.
By good luck a butcher came by just then, and he delivered them
over to him, and made the bargain in this way, that he should take
the butcher a measure of turnip-seed, and then the butcher was to
count him out a Brabant thaler for every seed. I call that well soldi
The peasant now went home, and carried the measure of turnip- seed to him on his back. On the way, however, he lost one seed out
of the bag. The butcher paid him justly as agreed on, and if the
peasant had not lost the seed, he would have had one thaler the more.
In the meantime, when he went on his way back, the seed had
378 GrimrrCs Complete Fairy Tales
grown into a tree which reached up to the sky. Then thought the
peasant, "As thou hast the chance, thou must just see what the an- gels are doing up there above, and for once have them before thine
eyes." So he climbed up, and saw that the angels above were threshing oats, and he looked on.
While he was thus watching them, he observed that the tree on
which he was standing, was beginning to totter; he peeped down,
and saw that some one was just going to cut it down. "If I were to
fall down from here it would be a bad thing," thought he, and in his necessity he did not know how to save himself better than by
taking the chaff of the oats which lay there in heaps, and twisting a
rope of it. He likewise snatched a hoe and a flail which were lying
about in heaven, and let himself down by the rope. But he came
down on the earth exactly in the middle of a deep, deep hole. So it
was a real piece of luck that he had brought the hoe, for he hoed
himself a flight of steps with it, and mounted up, and took the flail
with him as a token of his truth, so that no one could have any
doubt of his story.
The Moon
In days gone by there was a land where the nights were always
dark, and the sky spread over it like a black cloth, for there the
moon never rose, and no star shone in the obscurity. At the creation
of the world, the light at night had been sufficient. For young
fellows once went out of this country on a traveling expedition, and
arrived in another kingdom, where, in the evening when the sun
had disappeared behind the mountains, a shining globe was placed
on an oak tree, which shed a soft light far and wide. By means of
this, everything could very well be seen and distinguished, even
though it was not so brilliant as the sun. The travelers stopped and
asked a countryman who was driving past with his cart what land
of a light that was. "That is the moon," answered he; "our mayor bought it for three thalers, and fastened it to the oak tree. He has to
pour oil into it daily, and to keep it clean, so that it may always
bum clearly. He receives a thaler a week from us for doing it."
When the countryman had driven away, one of them said, "We could make some use of this lamp, we have an oak tree at home.
The Moon 379
which is just as big as this, and we could hang it on that. What a
pleasure it would be not to have to feel about at night in the darkness!" "I'll tell you what we'll do," said the second; "we will fetch a cart and horses and carry away the moon. The people here may
buy themselves another." "I'm a good climber," said the third, "I
wiU bring it down." The fourth brought a cart and horses, and the third climbed the tree, bored a hole in the moon, passed a rope
through it, and let it down. When the shining baU lay in the cart,
they covered it over with a cloth, that no one might observe the
theft. They conveyed it safely into their own country, and placed it
on a high oak. Old and young rejoiced when the new lamp let its
light shine over the whole land, and bed-rooms and sitting-rooms were filled with it. The dwarfs came forth from their caves in the
rocks, and the tiny elves in their little red coats danced in rings on the meadows.
The four took care that the moon was provided with oil, cleaned
the wick, and received their weekly thaler; but they became old
men, and when one of them grew ill, and saw that he was about to
die, he appointed that one quarter of the moon, should, as his property, be laid in the grave with him. When he died, the mayor
climbed up the tree, and cut off a quarter with the hedge-shears,
and this was placed in his coffin. The hght of the moon decreased,
but still not visibly. When the second died, the second quarter was
buried with him, and the light diminished. It grew weaker still
after the death of the third, who likewise took his part of it away
with him; and when the fourth was borne to his grave, the old state
of darkness recommenced, and whenever the people went out at
night without their lanterns they knocked their heads together.
When, however, the pieces of the moon had imited themselves
together again in the world below, where darkness had always
prevailed, it came to pass that the dead became restless and awoke
from their sleep. They were astonished when they were able to see
again; the moonlight was quite sufficient for them, for their eyes
had become so weak that they could not have borne the brilliance
of the sun. They rose up and were merry, and fell into their former
ways of living. Some of them went to the play and to dance, others
hastened to the public-houses, where they asked for wine, got
drunk, brawled, quarreled, and at last took up cudgels, and bela- bored each other. The noise became greater and greater, and at last reached even to heaven.
Saint Peter who guards the gate of heaven thought the lower
world had broken out in revolt and gathered together the heavenly
380 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
troops, which are to drive back the Evil One when he and his asso- ciates storm the abode of the blessed. As these, however, did not
come, he got on his horse and rode through the gate of heaven,
down into the world below. There he reduced the dead to subjection, bade them He down in their graves again, took the moon away
with him, and hung it up in heaven.
The Peasant in Heaven
Once upon a time a poor pious peasant died, and arrived before
the gate of heaven. At the same time a very rich, rich lord came
there who also wanted to get into heaven. Then Saint Peter came
with the key, and opened the door, and let the great man in, but
apparently did not see the peasant, and shut the door again. And
now the peasant outside heard how the great man was received in
heaven with all kinds of rejoicing, and how they were making
music, and singing within. At length aU became quiet again, and
Saint Peter came and opened the gate of heaven, and let the peasant in. The peasant, however, expected that they would make
music and sing when he went in also, but all remained quite quiet.
He was received with great aflFection, it is true, and the angels came
to meet him, but no one sang.
Then the peasant asked Saint Peter how it was that they did not
sing for him as they had done when the rich man went in, and said
that it seemed to him that there in heaven things were done with
just as much partiality as on earth. Then said Saint Peter, "By no means, thou art just as dear to us as any one else, and wilt enjoy
every heavenly delight that the rich man enjoys, but poor fellows
like thee come to heaven every day, but a rich man like this does
not come more than once in a hundred years 1"
Eve's Various Children
When Adam and Eve were driven out of Paradise, they were compelled to build a house for themselves on unfruitful ground, and eat
Eve's Various Children 381
their bread in the sweat of their brow. Adam dug up the land, and
Eve span. Every year Eve brought a child into the world; but the
children were unlike each other, some pretty, and some ugly.
After a considerable time had gone by, God sent an angel to
them, to announce that He was coming to inspect their household.
Eve, dehghted that the Lord should be so gracious, cleaned her
house diligently, decked it with flowers, and strewed reeds on the
floor. Then she brought in her children, but only the beautiful ones.
She washed and bathed them, combed their hair, put clean raiment
on them, and cautioned them to conduct themselves decorously and
modestly in the presence of the Lord. They were to bow down be- fore Him civilly, hold out their hands, and to answer His questions
modestly and sensibly.
The ugly children were, however, not to let themselves be seen.
One hid himself beneath the hay, another imder the roof, a third in
the straw, the fourth in the stove, the fifth in the cellar, the sixth
under a tub, the seventh beneath the wdne-cask, the eighth xmder an old fur cloak, the ninth and tenth beneath the cloth out of which
she always made their clothes, and the eleventh and twelfth under
the leather out of which she cut their shoes. She had scarcely got
ready, before there was a knock at the house-door. Adam looked
through a chink, and saw that it was the Lord. Adam opened the
door respectfully, and the Heavenly Father entered.
There, in a row, stood the pretty children, and bowed before
Him, held out their hands, and knelt down. The Lord, however,
began to bless them, laid His hands on the first, and said, "Thou
shalt be a powerful king"; and to the second, "Thou a prince"; to
the third, "Thou a count"; to the fourth, "Thou a knight"; to the
fifth, "Thou a nobleman"; to the sixth, "Thou a burgher"; to the
seventh, "Thou a merchant"; to the eighth, "Thou a learned man." He bestowed upon them also all His richest blessings.
When Eve saw that the Lord was so mild and gracious, she
thought, "I will bring hither my ill-favored children also; it may be
that He wiU bestow His blessing on them likewise." So she ran and brought them out of the hay, the straw, the stove, and wherever
else she had concealed them. Then came the whole coarse, dirty,
shabby, sooty band. The Lord smiled, looked at them all, and said,
"1 will bless these also." He laid His hands on the first, and said to
him, "Thou shalt be a peasant"; to the second, "Thou a fisherman";
to the third, "Thou a smith"; to the fourth, "Thou a tanner"; to the
fifth, "Thou a weaver"; to the sixth, "Thou a shoemaker"; to the
seventh, "Thou a tailor"; to the eighth, "Thou a potter"; to the
382 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
ninth, "Thou a wagoner"; to the tenth, "Thou a sailor"; to the eleventh, "Thou an errand-boy"; to the twelfth, "Thou a scullion all the
days of thy life."
When Eve had heard all this she said, "Lord, how unequally Thou dividest Thy gifts! After all they are all of them my children,
whom I have brought into the world. Thy favors should be given to
all alike." But God answered, "Eve, thou dost not understand. It is right and necessary that the entire world should be supplied from
thy children. If they were all Princes and lords, who would grow
com, thresh it, grind and bake it? Who would be blacksmiths,
weavers, carpenters, masons, laborers, tailors and seamstresses?
Each shall have his own place, so that one shall support the other,
and all shall be fed Hke the limbs of one body." Then Eve answered, "Ah, Lord, forgive me, I was too quick in speaking to
Thee. Have Thy divine will with my duldren."
The Poor Boy in the Grave
There was once a poor shepherd-boy whose father and mother
were dead, and he was placed by the authorities in the house of a
rich man, who was to feed him and bring him up. The man and his
wife had, however, bad hearts, and were greedy and anxious about
their riches, and vexed whenever any one put a morsel of their
bread in his mouth. The poor young fellow might do what he Hked,
he got little to eat, but only so many blows the more.
One day he had to watch a hen and her chickens, but she ran
through a quick-set hedge with them, and a hawk darted down instantly, and carried her off through the air. The boy called, "Thiefl
thiefl rascall" with all the strength of his body. But what good did that do? The hawk did not bring its prey back again. The man
heard the noise, and ran to the spot, and as soon as he saw that his
hen was gone, he fell in a rage, and gave the boy such a beating
that he could not stir for two days. Then he had to take care of the
chickens without the hen, but now his difficulty was greater, for
one ran here and the other there. He thought he was doing a very
wise thing when he tied them all together with a string, because
then the hawk would not be able to steal any of them away from
him. But he was very much mistaken. After two days, worn out
The Poor Boy in the Grave 383
with running about and hunger, he fell asleep. The bird of prey came, and seized one of the chickens, and as the others were tied fast
to it, it carried them all oflF together, perched itself on a tree, and
devoured them. The farmer was just coming home, and when he
saw the misfortune, he got angry and beat the boy so unmercifully
that he was forced to he in bed for several days.
When he was on his legs again, the farmer said to him, "You are too stupid for me, I cannot make a herdsman of you, you must go
as errand-boy." Then he sent him to the judge, to whom he was to carry a basketful of grapes, and he gave him a letter as well. On the
way, himger and thirst tormented the unhappy boy so violently that
he ate two of the bimches of grapes. He took the basket to the
judge, but when the judge had read the letter, and counted the
bunches he said, "Two clusters are wanting." The boy confessed quite honestly that, driven by hunger and thirst, he had devoured
the two which were wanting. The judge wrote a letter to the
farmer, and asked for the same number of grapes again. These also
the boy had to take to him with a letter. As he again was so extremely hungry and thirsty, he could not help it, and again ate two
bunches. But first he took the letter out of the basket, put it under a
stone and seated himself thereon in order that the letter might not
see and betray him. The judge, however, again made him give an
explanation about the missing bunches. "Ah," said the boy, "how have you learnt that? The letter could not know about it, for I put
it imder a stone before I did it." The judge could not help laughing
at the boy's simplicity, and sent the man a letter wherein he cau- tioned him to keep the poor boy better, and not let him want for
meat and drink, and also that he was to teach him what was right
and what was wrong.
"I will soon show you the difference," said the hard man. "If you must eat, you must work, and if you do anything wrong, you shall
be taught by blows." The next day he set him a hard task. He was to chop two bundles
of straw for food for the horses, and then the man threatened: "In five hours I shall be back again, and if the straw is not cut to chaff
by that time, I will beat you until you cannot move a limb." The farmer went with his wife, the manservant and the girl, to the
yearly fair, and left nothing behind for the boy but a small bit of
bread. The boy seated himself on the bench, and began to work
with all his might. As he got warm over it he put his httle coat off
and threw it on the straw. In his terror lest he should not get done
384 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
in time he kept constantly cutting, and in his haste, without noticing it, he chopped his little coat as well as the straw. He became
aware of the misfortune too late; there was no repairing it. "Ah,"
cried he, "now all is over with mel The wicked man did not threaten me for nothing; if he comes back and sees what I have
done, he will kill me. Rather than that I will take my own hfe."
The boy had once heard the farmer's wife say, "I have a pot with
poison in it under my bed." She, however, had only said that to keep away greedy people, for there was honey in it. The boy crept
under the bed, brought out the pot, and ate all that was in it. "I do
not know," said he, "folks say death is bitter, but it tastes very
sweet to me. It is no wonder that the farmer's wife has so often
longed for death." He seated himself in a little chair, and was prepared to die. But instead of becoming weaker he felt himself
strengthened by the noiuishing food. "It cannot have been poison,"
thought he, "but the farmer once said there was a small bottle of poison for flies in the box in which he keeps his clothes; that, no
doubt, will be the true poison, and bring death to me." It was, how- ever, no poison for flies, but Himgarian wine. The boy got out the
bottle, and emptied it. "This death tastes sweet too," said he, but shortly after when the wine began to mount into his brain and
stupefy him, he thought his end was drawing near. "I feel that I
must die," said he, *1 will go away to the church-yard, and seek a
grave." He staggered out, reached the church-yard, and laid him- self in a newly-dug grave. He lost his senses more and more. In the
neighborhood was an inn where a wedding was being kept. When
he heard the music, he fancied he was already in Paradise, until at
length he lost all consciousness. The poor boy never awoke again;
the heat of the strong wine and the cold night-dew deprived him of
Hfe, and he remained in the grave in which he had laid himself.
When the farmer heard the news of the boy's death he was terrified, and afraid of being brought to justice— indeed, his distress
took such a powerful hold of him that he fell fainting to the
ground. His wife, who was standing on the hetirth with a pan of hot
fat, ran to him to help him. But the flames darted against the pan
and the whole house caught fire. In a few hours it lay in ashes, and
the rest of the years they had to live they passed in poverty and
misery, tormented by the pangs of conscience.
Our Lady's Child
Close to a large forest there lived a wood-cutter and his wife. They
had an only child, a little girl three years old. They were so poor
that they no longer had daily bread, and did not know how to get
food for her. One morning the wood-cutter went out sorrowfully to
his work in the forest, and while he was cutting wood, suddenly there stood before him a tall and beautiful woman with a crown of
shining stars on her head. She said to him, "I am the Virgin Mary, mother of the child Jesus. Thou art poor and needy, bring thy child
to me, I will take her with me and be her mother, and care for her." The wood-cutter obeyed, brought his child, and gave her to the
Virgin Mary, who took her up to heaven with her. There the child
fared well, ate sugar-cakes, and drank sweet milk, and her clothes
were of gold, and the little angels played with her.
And when she was foiuteen years of age, the Virgin Mary called
her one day and said, "Dear child, I am about to make a long jour- ney, so take into thy keeping the keys of the thirteen doors of
heaven. Twelve of these thou mayest open, and behold the glory
which is within them, but the thirteenth, to which this little key belongs, is forbidden thee. Beware of opening it, or thou wilt bring
misery on thyself." The girl promised to be obedient, and when the Virgin Mary was gone, she began to examine the dwellings of the
kingdom of heaven. Each day she opened one of them, imtil she had made the round of the twelve. In each of them sat one of the
Apostles in the midst of a great light, and she rejoiced in all the
magnificence and splendor, and the Httle angels who always accom- panied her rejoiced with her.
Then the forbidden door alone remained, and she felt a great
desire to know what could be hidden behind it, and said to the angels, "I will not quite open it, and I will not go inside it, but I will
unlock it so that we can just see a little through the opening." *Oh,
no," said the little angels, "that would be a sin. The Virgin Mary
has forbidden it, and it might easily cause thy imhappiness." Then she was silent, but the desire in her heart was not stilled, but
gnawed there and tormented her, and let her have no rest. And
once when the angels had aU gone out, she thought, "Now I am
quite alone, and I could peep in. If I do it, no one will ever know."
386 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
She took the key, put it in the lock, and turned it round. Then the
door sprang open, and she saw there the Trinity sitting in fire and
splendor. She stayed there awhile, and looked at everything in
amazement; then she touched the light a Httle with her finger, and
her finger became quite golden. Immediately a great fear fell on
her. She shut the door violently, and ran away. Nor would her terror quit her, let her do what she might, and her heart beat continuEdly and would not be still; the gold, too, stayed on her finger,
and would not go away, let her rub it and wash it ever so much.
It was not long before the Virgin Mary came back from her journey. She called the girl before her, and asked to have the keys of
heaven back. When the maiden gave her the bunch, the Virgin
looked into her eyes and said, "Hast thou not opened the thirteenth
door also?" "No," she replied. Then she laid her hand on the girl's heart, and felt how it beat and beat, and saw right well that she
had disobeyed her order and had opened the door. Then she said
once again, "Art thou certain that thou hast not done it?" "Yes," said the girl, for the second time. Then she perceived the finger
which had become golden from touching the fire of heaven, and
saw well that the child had sinned, and said for the third time,
"Hast thou not done it?" "No," said the girl for the third time.
Then said the Virgin Mary, "Thou hast not obeyed me, and besides
that thou hast Med; thou art no longer worthy to be in heaven." Then the girl fell into a deep sleep, and when she awoke she lay
on the earth below, and in the midst of a wilderness. She wanted to
cry out, but she could bring forth no sound. She sprang up and
wanted to run away, but whithersoever she turned herself, she was
continually held back by thick hedges of thorns through which she
could not break. In the desert in which she was imprisoned, there
stood an old hollow tree, and this had to be her dwelling-place.
Into this she crept when night came, and here she slept. Here, too,
she found a shelter from storm and rain, but it was a miserable Hfe,
and bitterly did she weep when she remembered how happy she
had been in heaven, and how the angels had played with her. Roots
and wild berries were her only food, and for these she sought as far
as she could go.
In the autumn she picked up the fallen nuts and leaves, and
carried them into the hole. The nuts were her food in winter, and
when snow and ice came, she crept among the leaves like a poor Httle animal that she might not freeze. Before long her clothes were
all torn, and one bit of them after another feU off her. As soon, however, as the sun shone warm again, she went out and sat in front of
Our Lady's Child 387
the tree, and her long hair covered her on all sides Hlce a mantle.
Thus she sat year after year, and felt the pain and misery of the world.
One day, when the trees were once more clothed in fresh green,
the King of the country was hunting in the forest, and followed a
roe, and as it had fled into the thicket which shut in this bit of the
forest, he got off his horse, tore the bushes asunder, and cut himself
a path with his sword. When he had at last forced his way through,
he saw a wonderfully beautiful maiden sitting under the tree; and
she sat there and was entirely covered with her golden hair down
to her very feet. He stood still and looked at her full of surprise,
then he spoke to her and said, "Who art thou? Why art thou sitting
here in the wilderness?" But she gave no answer, for she could not
open her mouth. The King continued, "Wilt thou go with me to my
castle?" Then she just nodded her head a little. The King took her in his arms, carried her to his horse, and rode home with her, and
when he reached the royal castle he caused her to be dressed in
beautiful garments, and gave her all things in abundance. Although
she could not speak, she was still so beautiful and charming that he
began to love her with all his heart, and it was not long before he married her.
After a year or so had passed, the Queen brought a son into the
world. Thereupon the Virgin Mary appeared to her in the night
when she lay in her bed alone, and said, "If thou wilt tell the truth and confess that thou didst unlock the forbidden door, I will open
thy mouth and give thee back thy speech, but if thou perseverest in
thy sin, and deniest obstinately, I will take thy new-bom child
away with me." Then the Queen was permitted to answer, but she
remained hard, and said, "No, I did not open the forbidden door"; and the Virgin Mary took the new-bom child from her arms, and
vanished with it. Next morning, when the child was not to be
found, it was whispered among the people that the Queen was a
man-eater, and had killed her own child. She heard all this and
could say nothing to the contrary, but the King would not believe
it, for he loved her so much.
When a year had gone by the Queen again bore a son, and in the
night the Virgin Mary again came to her, and said, 'If thou wilt confess that thou openedst the forbidden door, I will give thee thy
child back and untie thy tongue; but if thou continuest in sin and
deniest it, I will take away with me this new child also." Then the
Queen again said, "No, I did not open the forbidden door"; and the Virgin took the child out of her arms, and away with her to heaven.
388 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
Next morning, when this child also had disappeared, the people declared quite loudly that the Queen had devoured it, and the King's councillors demanded that she should be brought to justice. The
King, however, loved her so dearly that he would not beUeve it,
and commanded the councillors under pain of death not to say any more about it.
The following year the Queen gave birth to a beaiitiful little
daughter, and for the third time the Virgin Mary appeared to her in
the night and said, "Follow me." She took the Queen by the hand and led her to heaven, and showed her there her two elder children, who smiled at her, and were playing with the baU of the
world. When the Queen rejoiced thereat, the Virgin Mary said, "Is thy heart not yet softened? If thou wilt own that thou openedst the
forbidden door, I will give thee back thy two httle sons." But for
the third time the Queen answered, "No, I did not open the forbidden door." Then the Virgin let her sink down to earth once more, and took from her likewise her third child.
Next morning, when the loss was reported, all the people cried
loudly, "The Queen is a man-eaterl She must be judged," and the King was no longer able to restrain his councillors. Thereupon a
trial was held, and as she could not answer, and defend herself, she
was condemned to be burnt ahve. The wood was got together, and
when she was fast boimd to the stake, and the fire began to bmm
round about her, the hard ice of pride melted, her heart was moved
by repentance, and she thought, 'If I could but confess before my
death that I opened the door." Then her voice came back to her,
and she cried out loudly, "Yes, Mary, I did it." Straightway rain fell from the sky and extinguished the flames of fire, and a fight broke
forth above her, and the Virgin Mary descended with the two fittle
sons by her side, and the new-bom daughter in her arms. She spoke
kindly to her, and said, "He who repents his sin and acknowledges
it, is forgiven." Then she gave her the three children, untied her tongue, and granted her happiness throughout her life.
Gambling Hansel
Once upon a time there was a man who did nothing but gamble,
and for that reason people never called him anything but Gambfing
Gambling Hansel 389
Hansel, and as he never ceased to gamble, he played away bis bouse and aU that he had.
Now the very day before bis creditors were to take bis bouse
from him, came the Lord and St. Peter, and asked him to give them
shelter for the night. Then Gambling Hansel said, "For my part, you may stay the night, but I cannot give you a bed or anything to
eat." So the Lord said he was just to take them in, and they themselves
would buy something to eat, to which Gambling Hansel made no
objection. Thereupon St. Peter gave him three groschen, and said
he was to go to the baker's and fetch some bread. So Gambling Hansel went, but when he reached the house where
the other gambling vagabonds were gathered together, they, al- though they had won all that he had, greeted him clamorously, and
said, "Hansel, do come in." "Oh," said he, "do you want to win the
three groschen, too?" On this they would not let him go. So he went in, and played away the three groschen also.
Meanwhile St. Peter and the Lord were waiting, and as he was so
long in coming, they set out to meet him. When Gambling Hansel
came, however, he pretended that the money had fallen into the
gutter, and kept raking about in it all the while to find it, but our
Lord already knew that he had lost it in play. St. Peter again gave
him three groschen, and now he did not allow himself to be led
away once more, but fetched them the loaf. Our Lord then inquired if he had no wine, and he said, "Alack, sir, the casks are all
emptyl" But the Lord said he was to go down into the cellar, for the best wine was still there. For a long time he would not believe
this, but at length he said, "Well, I will go down, but I know that
there is none there." When he turned the tap, however, lo and behold, the best of wine ran outi So he took it to them, and the two
passed the night there.
Early next day our Lord told Gambling Hansel that he might beg
three favors. The Lord expected that he would ask to go to Heaven;
but Gambling Hansel asked for a pack of cards with which he
could win everything, for dice with which he would win every- thing, and for a tree whereon every kind of fruit would grow, and
from which no one who had climbed up, could descend until he
bade him do so. The Lord gave him all that he had asked, and de- parted with St. Peter.
And now Gambling Hansel at once set about gambling in real
earnest, and before long he had gained half the world. Upon this
St. Peter said to the Lord, "Lord, this thing must not go on, he will
390 Grimms Complete Fairy Tales
wii^ and Thou lose, the whole world. We must send Death to him." When Death appeared. Gambling Hansel had just seated himself at
the gaming-table, and Death said, "Hansel, come out a while." But
Gambling Hansel said, "Jxist wait a little until the game is done, and in the meantime get up into that tree out there, and gather a
little fruit that we may have something to mimch on our way." Thereupon Death climbed up, but when he wanted to come down
again, he could not, and GambHng Hansel left him up there for
seven years, during which time no one died.
So St. Peter said to the Lord, 'Xord, this thing must not go on.
People no longer die; we must go om-selves." And they went them- selves, and the Lord commanded Hansel to let Death come down.
So Hansel went at once to Death and said to him, "Come down," and Death took him directly and put an end to him.
They went away together and came to the next world, and tben
Gambling Hansel made straight for the door of Heaven, and
knocked at it. "Who is there?" "Gambling Hansel." "Ah, we will
have nothing to do with himl Begonel" So he went to the door of
Purgatory, and knocked once more. "Who is there?" "Gambling
Hansel." "Ah, there is quite enough weeping and wailing here
without him. We do not want to gamble, just go away again." Then he went to the door of Hell, and there they let him in.
There was, however, no one at home but old Lucifer and the
crooked devils who had just been doing their evil work in the
world. And no sooner was Hansel there than he sat down to gamble
again. Lucifer, however, had nothing to lose but his misshapen
devils, and GambHng Hansel won them from him, as with his cards he could not fail to do.
Now he was off again with his crooked devils, and they went to
Hohenfuert and pulled up a hop-hole, and with it went to Heaven
and began to thrust the pole against it, and Heaven began to crack.
So again St. Peter said, "Lord, this thing cannot go on, we must let
him in, or he will throw us down from Heaven." And they let him in. But GambHng Hansel instantly began to play again, and there
was such a noise and confusion that there was no hearing what
they themselves were saying. Therefore St. Peter once more said,
"Lord, this cannot go on, we must throw him down, or he will
make all Heaven rebelHous." So they went to him at once, and threw him down, and his soul broke into fragments, and went into
the gambHng vagabonds who are Hving this very day.
The Old Man Made Young Again
In the time when our Lord still walked this earth, He and St. Peter
stopped one evening at a smith's and received free quarters. Then it came to pass that a poor beggar, badly pressed by age and
infirmity, came to this house and begged alms of the smith. St
Peter had compassion on him and said, "Lord and Master, if it please Thee, ciure his torments that he may be able to win his own
bread." The Lord said kindly, "Smith, lend Me thy forge, and put on some coals for Me, and then I will make this ailing old man
young again." The smith was quite willing, and St. Peter blew the bellows, and when the coal fire sparkled up large and high our
Lord took the little old man, pushed him in the forge in the midst
of the red-hot fire, so that he glowed like a rose-bush, and praised God with a loud voice. After that the Lord went to the quenching
tub, put the glowing little man into it so that the water closed over
him, and after He had carefully cooled him, gave him His blessing,
when beholdl the little man sprang nimbly out, looking fresh,
straight, healthy, and as if he were but twenty.
The smith, who had watched everything closely and attentively,
invited them all to supper. He, however, had an old, half-blind,
crooked mother-in-law who went to the youth, and with great earnestness asked if the fire had burnt him much. He answered that
he had never felt more comfortable, and that he had sat in the red
heat as if he had been in cool dew. The youth's words echoed in the ears of the old woman all night long, and early next morning,
when the Lord had gone on His way again and had heartily
thanked the smith, the latter thought he might make his old
mother-in-law young again likewise, as he had watched everything
so carefully, and it lay in the province of his trade. So he called to
ask her if she, too, would like to go bounding about Hke a girl of
eighteen. She said, "With all my heart, as the youth has come out of it so well." So the smith made a great fire, and thrust the old woman into it,
and she writhed about this way and that, and uttered terrible cries
of murder. "Sit still; why art thou screaming and jumping about
so?" cried he, and as he spoke he blew the bellows again until all her rags were burnt. The old woman cried without ceasing, and the
392 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
smith thought to himself, '1 have not quite the right art," and took her out and threw her into the cooling-tub. Then she screamed so
loudly that the smith's wife upstairs and her daughter-in-law heard, and they both ran downstairs, and saw the old woman lying in a
heap in the quenching-tub, howling and screaming, with her face wrinkled and shriveled and all out of shape. Thereupon the two,
who were both with child, were so terrified that that very night two
boys were bom who were not made Hke men but apes, and they
ran into the woods, and from them sprang the race of apes.
The Lord's Animals and the Devil's
The Lord God had created all animals, and had chosen the wolf to
be his dog, but he had forgotten the goat. Then the Devil made
ready and began to create also, and created goats with fine long
tails. Now when they went to pasture, they generally remained
caught in the hedges by their tails; then the Devil had to go there
and disentangle them, with a great deal of trouble. This enraged
him at last, and he went and bit off the tail of every goat, as may be
seen to this day by the stump. Then he let them go to pastiue alone.
It came to pass that the Lord God perceived how at one time
they gnawed away at a fruitful tree, at another injiured the noble
vines, or destroyed other tender plants. This distressed Him, so that
in His goodness and mercy He summoned His wolves, who soon
tore in pieces the goats that went there.
When the Devil observed this, he went before the Lord and said,
'Thy creatures have destroyed mine." The Lord answered, "Why
didst thou create things to do harm?" The Devil said, "I was com- pelled to do it: inasmuch as my thoughts rtm on evil, what I create
can have no other nature, and thou must pay me heavy damages."
"I will pay thee as soon as the oak leaves fall; come then, thy
money will then be ready counted out." When the oak leaves had fallen, the Devil came and demanded what was due to him. But the
Lord said, "In the church of Constantinople stands a tall oak tree
which still has all its leaves." With raging and curses, the Devil de- parted, and went to seek the oak, wandered in the wilderness for
six months before he found it, and when he returned, all the oaks
Master Pfriem 393
had in the meantime covered themselves again with green leaves.
Then he had to forfeit his indemnity, and in his rage he put out the
eyes of all the remaining goats, and put his own in instead.
This is why all goats have devil's eyes, why their tails are bitten ofiF, and why he Hkes to assume their shape.
Master Pfriem
Master Pfkeem* was a short, thin, but lively man, who never
rested a moment. His face, of which his tumed-up nose was the
only prominent feature, was marked with smallpox and pale as
death; his hair was gray and shaggy, his eyes small, but they
glanced perpetually about on all sides. He saw everything, criti- cized everything, knew everything best, and was always in the
right. When he went into the streets, he moved his arms about as if
he were rowing; and once he struck the pail of a girl, who was carrying water, so high in the air that he himself was wetted all over
by it. "Stupid thing," cried he to her, while he was shaking himself,
"could you not see that I was coming behind you?" By trade he was a shoemaker, and when he worked he pulled his
thread out with such force that he drove his fist into every one who
did not keep far enough off. No apprentice stayed more than a
month with him, for he had always some fault to find with the very
best work. At one time it was that the stitches were not even; at another that one shoe was too long, or one heel higher than the other,
or the leather not cut large enough. "Wait," said he to his apprentice, "I will soon show you how we make sldns soft," and he brought a strap and gave him a couple of strokes across the back.
He called them all sluggards. He himself did not turn much work
out of his hands, for he never sat still for a quarter of an hour.
If his wife got up very early in the morning and lighted the fire,
he jumped out of bed, and ran bare-footed into the kitchen, crying,
"Will you bum my house down for me? That is a fire one could
roast an ox byl Does wood cost nothing?" If the servants were standing by their wash-tubs and laughing, and telling each other all
they knew, he scolded them, and said, "There stand the geese cack-
• Pfriem: a cobbler's awl.
394 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
ling, and forgetting their work, to gossip! And why fresh soap? Disgraceful extravagance and shameful idleness into the bargain!
They want to save their hands, and not rub the things properly!" And out he would run and knock a pail full of soap and water over, so that the whole kitchen was flooded.
Some one was building a new house, so he hurried to the window
to look on. "There, they are using that red sand-stone again that
never dries!" cried he. "No one v^dll ever be healthy in that house! And just look how badly the fellows are laying the stones! Besides,
the mortar is good for nothing! It ought to have gravel in it, not
sand. I shall live to see that house tumble down on the people who
are in it." He sat dowm, put a couple of stitches in, and then jumped
up again, unfastened his leather-apron, and cried, "I vwll just go
out, and appeal to those men's consciences." He stumbled on the
carpenters. "What's this?" cried he, "you are not working by the line! Do you expect the beams to be straight?— one wrong wall put
all wrong." He snatched an axe out of a carpenter's hand and wanted to show him how he ought to cut; but as a cart loaded with
clay came by, he threw the axe away, and hastened to the peasant
who was walking by the side of it. "You are not in your right
mind," said he, "who yokes young horses to a heavily laden cart?
The poor beasts will die on the spot." The peasant did not give him an answer, and Pfriem in a rage ran back into his workshop.
When he was setting himself to work again, the apprentice
reached him a shoe. "Well, what's that again?" screamed he.
"Haven't I told you you ought not to cut shoes so broad? Who would buy a shoe like this, which is hardly anything else but a sole? I insist on my orders being followed exactly." "Master," answered the
apprentice, "you may easily be quite right about the shoe being a bad one, but it is the one which you yourself cut out, and yourself
set to work at. When you jumped up a while since, you knocked it
off the table, and I have only just picked it up. An angel from
heaven, however, would never make you believe that." One night Master Pfriem dreamed he was dead, and on his way
to heaven. When he got there, he knocked loudly at the door. '1
wonder," said he to himself, "that they have no knocker on the door
—one knocks one's knuckles sore." The apostle Peter opened the
door, and wanted to see who demanded admission so noisily. "Ah,
it's you, Master Pfriem"; said he, "well, I'll let you in, but I warn you that you must give up that habit of yours, and find fault with
nothing you see in heaven, or you may fare ill." "You might have
spared your warning," answered Pfriem. "I know already what is
Master Pfriem 395
seemly, and here, God be thanked, everything is perfect, and there
is nothing to blame as there is on earth." So he went in, and walked up and down the wide expanses of heaven. He looked around him,
to the left and to the right, but sometimes shook his head, or muttered something to himself.
Then he saw two angels who were carrying away a beam. It was
the beam which some one had had in his own eye while he was
looking for the splinter in the eye of another. They did not, however, carry the beam lengthways, but obliquely. "Did any one ever
see such a piece of stupidity?" thought Master Pfriem; but he said
nothing, and seemed satisfied with it. "It comes to the same thing after all, whichever way they carry the beam, straight or crooked, if
they only get along with it, and truly I do not see them knock
against anything." Soon after this he saw two angels who were drawing water out of
a well into a bucket, but at the same time he observed that the
bucket was full of holes, and that the water was running out of it
on every side. They were watering the earth with rain. "Hang it,"
he exclaimed; but happily recollected himself, and thought, "Per- haps it is only a pastime. If it is an amusement, then it seems they
can do useless things of this kind even here in heaven, where people, as I have already noticed, do nothing but idle about." He went farther and saw a cart which had stuck fast in a deep
hole. 'It's no wonder," said he to the man who stood by it; "who
would load so unreasonably? What have you there?" "Good
wishes," replied the man. "I could not go along the right way with
it, but still I have pushed it safely up here, and they won't leave me
sticking here." In fact an angel did come and harnessed two horses
to it. "That's quite right," thought Pfriem, 'TDut two horses won't
get that cart out, it must at least have four to it." Another angel came and brought two more horses; she did not, however, harness
them in front of it, but behind.
That was too much for Master Pfriem. "Clumsy creature," he
burst out with, "what are you doing there? Has any one ever since the world began seen a cart drawn in that way? But you, in your
conceited arrogance, think that you know everything best." He was going to say more, but one of the inhabitants of heaven seized him
by the throat and pushed him forth with irresistible strength. Beneath the gateway Master Pfriem turned his head roiind to take one
more look at the cart, and saw that it was being raised into the air
by four winged horses.
At this moment Master Pfriem awoke. "Things are certainly ar-
396 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
ranged in heaven otherwise than they are on earth," said he to himself, "and that excuses much; but who can see horses harnessed both behind and before with patience; to be sure they had wings,
but who could know that? It is, besides, great folly to fix a pair of
wings to a horse that has four legs to run with already! But I must
get up, or else they will make nothing but mistakes for me in my
house. It is a lucky thing for me though, that I am not really dead."
The Heavenly Wedding
A POOR PEASANT-BOY One day heard the priest say in church that
whosoever desired to enter into the kingdom of heaven must always
go straight onward. So he set out, and walked continually straight
onward over hill and valley without ever turning aside. At length
his way led him into a great town, and into the midst of a chmrch,
where just at that time God's service was being performed. Now when he beheld all the magnificence of this, he thought he had
reached heaven, sat down, and rejoiced with his whole heart. When
the service was over, and the clerk bade him go out, he rephed,
"No, I will not go out again, I am glad to be in heaven at last." So the clerk went to the priest, and told him that there was a child in
the church who would not go out again, because he believed he
was in heaven. The priest said, "If he believes that, we will leave
him inside." So he went to him, and asked if he had any inclination
to work. "Yes," the little fellow replied, "I am accustomed to work,
but I will not go out of heaven again." So he stayed in the church, and when he saw how the people
came and knelt and prayed to Our Lady with the blessed child
Jesus which was carved in wood, he thought "that is the good
God," and said, "Dear God, how thin You arel The people must certainly let You starve; but every day I will give You half my dinner." From this time forth, he every day took half his dinner to the image, and the image began to enjoy the food. When a few weeks
had gone by, people remarked that the image was growing larger
and stout and strong, and wondered much. The priest also could
not understand it, but stayed in the church, and followed the little
boy about, and then he saw how he shared his food with the Virgin
Mary, and how She accepted it.
God^s Food 397
After some time the boy became ill, and for eight days could not
leave his bed; but as soon as he could get up again, the first thing
he did was to take his food to Our Lady. The priest followed him,
and heard him say, "Dear God, do not take it amiss that I have not brought You anything for such a long time, for I have been ill and
could not get up." Then the image answered him and said, "I have seen thy good-wiU, and that is enough for me. Next Sunday thou
shalt go with me to the wedding." The boy rejoiced at this, and repeated it to the priest, who begged him to go and ask the image
if he, too, might be permitted to go. "No," answered the image,
"thou alone." The priest wished to prepare him first, and give him the holy communion and the child was willing, and next Sunday,
when the host came to him, he fell down and died, and was at the
eternal wedding.
God's Food
There w^ere once upon a time two sisters, one of whom had no children and was rich, and the other had five and was a widow, and so
poor that she no longer had food enough to satisfy herself and her
children. In her need, therefore, she went to her sister, and said,
"My children and I are suffering the greatest hunger; thou art rich,
give me a mouthful of bread." The very rich sister was as hard as a
stone, and said, "I myself have nothing in the house," and drove away the poor creature with harsh words.
After some time the husband of the rich sister came home, and
was just going to cut himself a piece of bread, but when he made
the first cut into the loaf, out flowed red blood. When the woman
saw that she was terrified and told him what had occurred. He hurried away to help the widow and her children, but when he entered
her room, he found her praying. She had her two younger children
in her arms, and the three older ones were lying dead. He offered
her food, but she answered, "For earthly food have we no longer any desire. God has already satisfied the hunger of three of us, and
He will hearken to our supplications likewise." Scarcely had she ut- tered these words than the two httle ones drew their last breath,
whereupon her heart broke, and she sank down dead.
St. Joseph in the Forest
There was once oii a time a mother who had three daughters, the
eldest of whom was rude and wicked, the second much better, although she had her faults, but the yoimgest was a pious, good
child. The mother was, however, so strange, that it was just the eldest daughter whom she most loved, and she could not bear the
yoimgest. On this account, she often sent the poor girl out into the
great forest in order to get rid of her, for she thought she would
lose herself and never come back again. But the guardian-angel
which every good child has, did not forsake her, but always
brought her into the right path again.
Once, however, the guardian-angel behaved as if he were not
there, and the child could not find her way out of the forest again.
She walked on constantly until evening came, and then she saw a
tiny light burning in the distance, ran up to it at once, and came to
a little hut. She knocked, the door opened, and she came to a second door, where she knocked again. An old man, who had a snowwhite beard and looked venerable, opened it for her; and he was no
other than St. Joseph. He said quite kindly, "Come, dear child, seat thyself on my little chair by the fire, and warm thyself; I will fetch
thee clear water if thou art thirsty; but here in the forest, I have
nothing for thee to eat but a couple of little roots, which thou must
first scrape and boil." St. Joseph gave her the roots. The girl scraped them clean, then
she brought a piece of pancake and the bread that her mother had
given her to take with her; mixed all together in a pan, and cooked
herself a thick soup. When it was ready, St. Joseph said, "I am so
hungry; give me some of thy food." The child was quite wilHng,
and gave him more than she kept for herself, but God's blessing was with her, so that she was satisfied. When they had eaten, St.
Joseph said, "Now we will go to bed; I have, however, only one
bed, lay thyself in it. I will lie on the ground on the straw." "No,"
answered she, "stay in thy own bed, the straw is soft enough for
me." St. Joseph, however, took the child in his arms and carried her into the Httle bed, and there she said her prayers, and fell asleep.
Next morning when she awoke, she wanted to say good morning
to St. Joseph, but she did not see him. Then she got up and looked
St. Joseph in the Forest 399
for him, but could not find him anywhere; at last she perceived,
behind the door, a bag with money so heavy that she could just
carry it, and on it was written that it was for the child who had
slept there that night. On this she took the bag, bounded away with
it, and got safely to her mother, and as she gave her mother all the
money, she could not help being satisfied with her.
The next day, the second child also took a fancy to go into the
forest. Her mother gave her a much larger piece of pancake and
bread. It happened with her just as with the first child. In the evening, she came to St. Joseph's little hut, who gave her roots for a
thick soup. When it was ready, he likewise said to her, "I am so
hungry, give me some of thy food." Then the child said, "Thou
mayest have thy share." Afterwards, when St. Joseph offered her his
bed and wanted to lie on the straw, she replied, "No, lie down in
the bed, there is plenty of room for both of us." St. Joseph took her in his arms and put her in the bed, and laid himself on the straw.
In the morning when the child awoke and looked for St. Joseph,
he had vanished, but behind the door she found a little sack of
money that was about as long as a hand, and on it was written that
it was for the child who had slept there last night. So she took the
little bag and ran home with it, and took it to her mother, but she
secretly kept two pieces for herself.
The eldest daughter had by this time grown curious, and the next
morning also insisted on going out into the forest. Her mother gave
her pancakes with her— as many as she wanted, and bread and
cheese as weU. In the evening she found St. Joseph in his little hut,
just as the two others had found him. When the soup was ready
and St. Joseph said, "I am so hungry, give me some of the food,"
the girl answered, "Wait until I am satisfied; then if there is anything left thou shalt have it." She ate, however, nearly the whole of it, and St. Joseph had to scrape the dish. Afterwards, the good old
man offered her his bed, and wanted to He on the straw. She took it
without making any opposition, laid herseff down in the httle bed,
and left the hard straw to the white-hatred man.
Next morning when she awoke, St. Joseph was not to be found, but she did not trouble herseff about that. She looked behind the
door for a money-bag. She fancied something was lying on the
ground, but as she could not very well distinguish what it was, she
stooped down and examined it closely, but it remained hanging to
her nose, and when she got up again, she saw, to her horror, that it
was a second nose, which was hanging fast to her own. Then she
began to scream and howl, but that did no good; she was forced to
40O Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
see it always on her nose, for it stretched out so far. Then she ran
out and screamed without stopping till she met St. Joseph, at whose
feet she fell and begged until, out of pity, he took the nose off her
again, and even gave her two pennies.
When she got home, her mother was standing before the door,
and asked, "What hast thou had given to thee?" Then she Hed and
said, "A great bag of money, but I have lost it on the way." "Lost
itr cried the mother, "oh, but we will soon find it again," and took her by the hand, and wanted to seek it with her. At first she began
to cry, and did not wish to go, but at last she went. On the way,
however, so many lizards and snakes broke loose on both of them,
that they did not know how to save themselves. At last they stung
the wicked child to death, and they stung the mother in the foot,
because she had not brought her up better.
The Three Green Twigs
There was once on a time a hermit who lived in a forest at the foot
of a mountain, and passed his time in prayer and good works, and
every evening he carried, to the glory of God, two pails of water up
the mountain. Many a beast drank of it, and many a plant was
refreshed by it, for on the heights above a strong wind blew continually, which dried the air and the ground, and the wild birds
which dread mankind wheel about there, and with their sharp
eyes search for a drink. And because the hermit was so pious, an
angel of God, visible to his eyes, went up with him, counted his
steps, and when the work was completed, brought him his food,
even as the prophet of old was by God's command fed by the raven. When the hermit in his piety had already reached a great
age, it happened that he once saw from afar a poor sinner being
taken to the gallows. He said carelessly to himself, "There, that one
is getting his deserts 1" In the evening, when he was carrying the water up the mountain,
the angel who usually accompanied him did not appear, and also
brought him no food. Then he was terrified, and searched his heart,
and tried to think how he could have sinned, as God was so angry,
but he did not discover it. Then he neither ate nor drank, threw
The Three Green Twigs 401
himself down on the ground, and prayed day and night. And as he
was one day thus bitterly weeping in the forest, he heard a little
bird singing beautifully and delightfully, and then he was still
more troubled and said, "How joyously thou singest, the Lord is not angry with thee. Ah, if thou couldst but tell me how I can have
offended Him, that I might do penance, and then my heart also
would be glad again."
Then the bird began to speak and said, "Thou hast done injus- tice, in that thou hast condemned a poor sinner who was being led
to the gallows, and for that the Lord is angry with thee. He alone
sits in judgment. However, if thou wilt do penance and repent thy
sins, He will forgive thee." Then the angel stood beside him with a
dry branch in his hand and said, "Thou shalt carry this dry branch until three green twigs sprout out of it, but at night when thou vvdlt
sleep, thou shalt lay it under thy head. Thou shalt beg thy bread
from door to door, and not tarry more than one night in the same
house. That is the penance which the Lord lays on thee." Then the hermit took the piece of wood, and went back into the
world, which he had not seen for so long. He ate and drank nothing
byt what was given him at the doors; many petitions were, however, not Ustened to, and many doors remained shut to him, so that
he often did not get a crumb of bread.
Once when he had gone from door to door from morning tiU
night, and no one had given him anything, and no one would shel- ter him for the night, he went forth into a forest, and at last found a
cave which some one had made, and an old woman was sitting in
it. Then said he, "Good woman, keep me with you in your house
for this night"; but she said, "No, I dare not, even if I wished. I have three sons who are wicked and wild; if they come home from
their robbing expedition, and find you, they wiU IdU us both." The
hermit said, "Let me stay, they will do no injury either to you or to
me," and the woman was compassionate, and let herself be per- suaded. Then the man lay down beneath the stairs, and put the bit
of wood imder his head. When the old woman saw him do that, she
asked the reason of it, on which he told her that he carried the bit
of wood about with him for a penance, and used it at night for a
pillow, and that he had offended the Lord, because, when he had
seen a poor sinner on the way to the gallows, he had said he was
getting his deserts. Then the woman began to weep and cried, 'Tf the Lord thus punishes one single word, how will it fare with my
sons when they appear before Him in judgment?"
402 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
At midnight the robbers came home and blustered and stormed.
They made a fire, and when it had lighted up the cave and they
saw a man lying under the stairs, they feU in a rage and cried to
their mother, "Who is the man? Have we not forbidden any one
whatsoever to be taken in?" Then said the mother, "Let him alone,
it is a poor sinner who is expiating his crime." The robbers asked,
"What has he done?" "Old man," cried they, "tell us thy sins." The old man raised himself and told them how he, by one single word,
had so sinned that God was angry with him, and how he was now
expiating this crime.
The robbers were so powerfully touched in their hearts by this
story, that they were shocked with their life up to this time,
reflected, and began with hearty repentance to do penance for it.
The hermit, after he had converted the three sinners, lay down to
sleep again under the stairs. In the morning, however, they found
him dead, and out of the dry wood on which his head lay, three
green twigs had grown up on high. Thus the Lord had once more received him into His favor.
Our Lady's Little Glass
Once upon a time a wagoner s cart which was heavily laden with
wine had stuck so fast that in spite of all that he could do, he could
not get it to move again. Then it chanced that Our Lady just happened to come by that way, and when She perceived the poor
man's distress. She said to him, "I am tired and thirsty, give Me a
glass of wine, and I will set thy cart free for thee." "Willingly," answered the wagoner, 'Tjut I have no glass in which I can give Thee
the wine." Then Our Lady plucked a little white flower with red stripes, called field bindweed, which looks very like a glass, and
gave it to the wagoner. He filled it with wine, and then Our Lady
drank it, and in the self-same instant the cart was set free, and the
wagoner could drive onwards. The little flower is still always called
Our Lady's Little Glass.
Brother Frolick
For a long time the King of a certain country had been at war. At
last it came to an end, and many soldiers were discharged. One of
them was a fellow called Brother Frolick because he was such a
lighthearted, jolly fellow; and although he only received a small
loaf and four kreutzers in gold, he started on a journey through the
world with a merry heart.
He had not gone far, when he saw a poor beggar sitting by the
roadside begging, but he did not know that it was a saint in disguise. The beggar asked for alms, and Brother Frolick said, "What shall I give you? I am only a poor, discharged soldier, and all they
have given me is a loaf of bread and four kreutzers, and when it is
all gone, I must beg as well as you. However, I will give you something." Then he divided the loaf into four pieces, and gave one to the beggar, as well as one of his gold pieces.
The beggar thanked him, and went away, but only to a little distance. Again changing his appearance and face, he seated himself
by the highway, waited for Brother FroHck to pass, and again
begged for alms. The good-natured soldier gave this beggar also a
fourth of his bread and a gold piece.
The saint thanked him, and, after walking some distance, a third
time seated himself in another form to beg of Brother Frolick. This
time, also, he gave him a third piece of the divided loaf and another
kreutzer. The beggar thanked him and went away.
The Idndhearted fellow had now only a fourth part of the loaf
and one gold piece left, so he went to an inn, ate the bread, and
paid his kreutzer for a jug of beer. As soon as he had finished, he
went out, and traveled on for some distance, and there again was
the saint in the form of a discharged soldier hke himself. "Good
evening, comrade," he said; "could you give me a piece of bread,
and a kreutzer to buy something to drink?"
"Where am I to get it?" answered Brother Frolick. "I had my dis- charge today, and they gave me a loaf of bread and foiu- gold kreutzers. But I met three beggars on the high road, and I gave
them each a fourth part of my bread and a kreutzer, and the last
kreutzer I have just paid for something to drink with my last piece
404 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
of bread. Now I am empty, and if you also have nothing, we can go
and beg together."
"No," answered the saint, "we need not do that; I understand a little of medicine and surgery, and can soon earn as much as I shall
want." "Well," replied Brother Frolick, "I don't understand doctoring at all, so I must go and beg alone." "No; come with me," cried
the other; "whatever I earn, you shall have half." "That is good
news for me," said Brother FroHck, so they went away together.
After a time, as they passed a peasant's house, they heard great cries and lamentations, so they went in, and found the husband
very ill and at the point of death, and the wife weeping and howling with all her might. "Leave off that noise," said the saint; "I will
soon cure your husband." Then he took some salve out of his pocket, and healed the man so quickly that he could stand up and
was quite well.
The husband and wife joyfully thanked the stranger, and said,
"What can we give you in return for this kindness?" But the saint would name nothing, and, worse still, refused all they brought to
him; and although Brother FroHck nudged him more than once, he
still said, "No; I will take nothing— we do not want it." At last the grateful people brought a lamb, and said that he must
take it whether he would or not. Then Brother Frolick nudged him
in the side, and said, "Take it, stupid; you know we do want it."
Then the saint said at last, "Well, I will take the lamb, but I cannot carry it; you must do that, if you want it so much." "Oh, that
will be no trouble to me," cried the other, and taking it on his shoulder they went away together.
After a while, they came to a wood, and Brother Frolick, who
began to feel tired and hungry, for the lamb was heavy, proposed
that they should stop and rest. "See," he said, "this is a beautiful
place for us to cook the lamb and eat it."
"I^'s all the same to me," replied the saint, "but I can have noth- ing to do with the cooking; you must do that if you have a kettle,
and I will go away for a little while till it is ready. You must not,
however, eat any till I come back; I will be here quite in time." "Go
along," said Brother Frolick, "1 understand how to cook, and I will
soon have dinner ready." Then the saint went away, and Brother Frolick slaughtered the
lamb, lighted a fire, and threw some of the flesh into the kettle to
boil. The meat was quite ready, however, before the saint returned,
and Brother Frolick became so impatient, that he took out of the
kettle a part of the flesh, in which was the heart. "The heart is the
Brother Frolick 405
best of all," he said, tasting it, and finding it very good he ate it aU.
At last his comrade returned and said: "You may eat aU the lamb
yourself, I only want the heart, so just give it me." Then Brother Frolick took a knife and fork and began searching
among the pieces of meat for the heart, which, of coiurse, he could
not find. Then he said pertly, "It is not there." "Then where can it be?" said the saint.
"I do not know," said Brother Frolick; "but see," he added,
"why, what a couple of fools we are, searching for a lamb's heart;
of course there is not one to be found, for a lamb has no heart."
"Ah," said the other, "that is news. Every animal has a heart,
why should not a lamb?"
"No, certainly, brother," he said, "a lamb has no heart; reflect a
Httle, and you will be convinced that it really has none."
"Well, certainly, it is quite clear that there is no heart to be foimd in this one, and as I do not want any other part, you may eat
it all yourself."
"I cannot eat it all," replied Brother Frolick, "so what is left I
will put into my knapsack." When this was done, the two started to continue their journey,
and Brother Peter, as the saint called himself, caused a large quantity of water to rise on the road just across where they had to pass.
Said Brother Peter, "You go first." "No," answered the other, "I
would rather see you across," for he thought, "if the water is very
deep, I won't go at all." So Brother Peter stepped over, and the water only came up to his
knees. His comrade prepared to follow, but he had not gone far
when the water came up to his neck. "Brother, help me," he cried.
"Will you confess, then, that you ate the lamb's heart?" he replied.
"No," he said, "I did not eat it." Immediately the water became deeper, and flowed to his mouth.
"Help! help me, brother," he cried. "Will you confess now that you
have eaten the lamb's heart?" cried Brother Peter. "No," he repHed, "I did not eat it." Now the saint did not intend to drown him, so he allowed the
water to subside, and Brother FroUck crossed over safely. They
traveled after this till they reached a foreign land, and in the chief
city heard that the King's daughter was very iU, and not expected to live.
"Holloal brother," said the soldier, "that is a good chance for us;
if you cxure her, we shall never know want again." But Brother Peter did not hurry himself, and when his comrade
4o6 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
begged him to put his best foot foremost, he went slower than ever.
Brother Frolick pushed him and dragged him on, but all to no purpose, and at last they heard that the King's daughter was dead.
"There now," cried Brother Frolick, "we have lost our chance, aU
through your sleepy walking."
"Be quiet, now," said Brother Peter; "I can not only cure the
sick, but I can restore the dead to life." "If that is the case," replied
his comrade, "you may be sure that the King will be ready to give
us the half of his kingdom for joy."
They therefore went to the King's castle, and found them all in
great grief. But Brother Peter said to the King, "Do not mourn, I can restore the Princess to Hfe."
He and his comrade were at once led to her room, and telling everyone to go out, they were left alone with the dead Princess.
Brother Peter immediately stripped the body of the grave-clothes, and laid it in a bath of very hot water, which he had ordered to be
brought. Then he uttered a few strange words, which his conu-ade
tried to remember, and turning to the Princess, said, "I command
thee to come out of the bath, and stand on thy feet." Immediately the Princess rose, and was again aHve and well. The
chamber-women were sent for, and the Princess in her royal clothes
was taken to her father, who received her with great joy, and said
to the two strangers, "Name your reward; it shall be yours, even to
the half of my kingdom." But Brother Peter replied, "No, I will
take no reward for what I have done." "Oh, you foolish fellow," thought Brother Frolick to himself. Then he nudged him again in
the side: "How can you be so stupid? If you don't want anything, I
do." Brother Peter, however, stiU refused, but the King, seeing that his
comrade was quite willing to accept something, told his treasurer to
fin the soldier's knapsack with gold. They left the city after this, and traveled on tiU they came to a
wood. Then said Brother Peter, "We may as weU divide that gold."
"With all my heart," repHed the good-natured fellow.
Peter took the gold, and divided it into three portions. "What is
that for?" asked Brother Frolick. "What have you got in your head
now? There are only two of us."
"Oh," he replied, "it is all right. One third is for myself, one third
for you, and one third for hinn who ate the lamb's heart." "Oh, I ate
that," cried Brother Frolick, gathering the money up quickly. "I did
indeed; can't you believe me?"
"How can it be true?" replied Peter; "a lamb has no heart."
Brother Frolick 407
"Nonsense, brother," he said, "what are you thinldng of? A lamb
has a heart as well as other animals. Why should he not have one?"
"Now really this is too good," replied Brother Peter. "However, you may keep all the gold to yourself, but I wi\l go on my way
alone in future." "As you please, brother," answered the soldier.
"Farewell." Then Peter started on another road, and left Brother
Frolick to go oflF by himself. "It is just as well," thought he, "but still he is a most wonderful man." The soldier had now quite as much money as he wanted, but he
knew not how to spend it properly. He wasted it or gave it away,
till as time went on he was again almost penniless. At last he arrived at a city where he heard that the King's daughter had just
died. "Hello," thought he, "here is an opportunity; I know how to restore her to life, and they will pay me something worth having
this time." So he went to the King and told him that he could re- store his daughter to life.
Now the King had heard of the discharged soldier who had
lately given new life to a Princess, and he thought Brother Frolick
was the man. StiU, as he was not quite siu^e, he asked him first for
his opinion, and whether he would venture if the Princess was re- ally dead.
The soldier had no fear, so he ordered the bath to be filled with
hot water, and went into the room with the dead Princess alone.
Then he stripped her of her clothes, placed her in the bath, and
said, as he supposed, the words which Brother Peter had said, but
the dead body did not move, although he repeated the words three
times. He now began to feel alarmed, and cried out in angry tones,
"Stand up, will you, or you will get what you don't expect." At this moment the saint appeared in his former shape as a
discharged soldier, and entered the room through the window.
"You foolish man," he cried, "how can you raise the dead to Hfe? I
will help you this time, but don't attempt it again." Thereupon he pronoimced the magic words, and immediately the
Princess rose and stood on her feet, and was as well and strong as
ever. Then the saint went away through the window, the maids
were sent for to dress the Princess in her royal robes, and then the
soldier led her to her father. He knew, however, that he was not
free to ask for a reward, for Peter had forbidden him to take anything, and therefore when the King asked him what he would have,
he said he would take nothing, although he wanted it so much
through extravagance and folly. Yet the King ordered his knapsack
to be filled with gold, and with many thanks he took his departiure.
4o8 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
Outside near the castle gate he met the saint, who said to him,
"See now, I forbade you to take anything, and yet you have received a knapsack full of gold.** "What could I do," he replied,
"when they would put it in for me?"
"Then I can only tell you," was the reply, "that if you get into trouble a second time by undertaking what you cannot perform, it
will be worse for you." "All right, brother; I don't care, now I have the gold, and I shall not care about putting dead people into a bath
again after this."
"Ah," said the saint, "your gold wiU not last long. However, if you do not after this go into imlawful paths, I will give to your
knapsack the power of containing in itself whatever you may wish
for. And now farewell, you will see me no more."
"Good-bye," said the soldier, as he turned away. "Well," he
thought, "I am glad that he is gone; he is a wonderful fellow, no
doubt, but I am better without him for a companion." To the wonderful power with which he had endowed his knapsack Brother Frolick never gave a thought.
He went on his way with his gold from place to place, and spent
and wasted it as he did before, and at last he had nothing left but
four kreutzers. With this sum he entered an inn by the roadside,
and felt that the money must go, so he spent three kreutzers in
wine, and one in bread.
As he sat eating his bread and drinking his wine, the fragrant
smell of roast goose reached his nose. Brother Frolick looked round
and peeped about, and at last saw that the landlady had two geese
roasting in the oven.
Then he suddenly remembered what his old comrade had said,
that whatever he wished for he would find in his knapsack. "Aha,"
he said to himself, "then I must wish for the geese to be there."
Then he went out, and before the door he said, "I wish that the
two geese roasting in the oven were in my knapsack." When he had
said this he took it ofiF, peeped in, and there they both lay. "Ahl" he
exclaimed, "this is all right. I am a mighty fellow after all," and going farther into a meadow, sat down to enjoy his good fare.
Just as he had finished eating one goose, two farmhands came by,
and when they saw the remaining goose, they stood stiU and looked
at it with hungry eyes. "Well," thought Brother Frolick, "one is
enough for me." So he beckoned the workers nearer, and said,
"Here, take this goose, and drink my health as you eat it." They thanked him and went away quickly to the inn, bought
Brother Frolick 409
some wine and bread, and then unpacked the goose which had
been given them, and began to eat it.
The landlady, when she saw it, went to her husband, and said,
"Those two are eating goose, just see if one of ours is gone from the
oven." The landlord ran to look, and found the oven empty. Tou
thieves 1" he exclaimed, running out to them, "where did you get roast goose to eat? TeU me instantly, or I wiU give you a taste of
green hazel juicel" "We are not thieves," they cried; "a discharged
soldier gave us this goose yonder in the meadow." "You are not
going to make me believe that," cried the landlord; "that soldier has been here, and a most respectable fellow he is; I watched him
when he left the house and he had nothing with him then. No; you
are the thieves, and shall pay for the goosel" But as they could not pay for it, he took a stick and thrashed them out of the house.
Quite ignorant of all this, Brother Frolick went on his way, till he
came to a place where stood a beautiful castle, and not far from it,
a large but mean-looldng inn. The soldier went up to the inn and
asked for a night's lodging. But the landlord said, "There is no
room here; the house is full of noble guests." "I wonder at that,"
said Brother Frolick, "why should they come here instead of going
to that beautiful castle yonder?"
"Ah, yes,' said the landlord, "many have thought as you do; they have gone to spend a night at the castle, but they have never returned aUve. None are allowed to remain," said the landlord, "who
do not go in on their heads." "I am not likely to walk in on my
head," said the soldier; "but now, landlord, let me take something
with me to eat and drink, and I'll go." So the landlord brought him a good supper to take with him, and
then Brother Frolick set out to go to the castle. On arriving, he first
sat down and ate with great relish, and when he began to feel
sleepy, laid himself on the groimd, for there was no bed, and was
soon asleep.
In the night, however, he was wakened by a terrible noise, and
when he roused himself he saw nine hideous imps in the room,
dancing round a pole, which they held in their hands. "Dance
away," he cried, "as long as you will, but don't come near me." The imps, however, disregarded his orders; nearer and nearer they ap- proached as they danced, till one of them trod on his face, with his
heavy foot.
"Keep away, you wretches," he cried. But still they came nearer. Then Brother Frolick grew angry. He started up, seized a chair.
410 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
and struck out right and left. But nine imps against one soldier is
rather too much, and if he struck one before him, another behind
would pull his hair most immercifully. "You demons," he cried suddenly, "I'll take care of you; wait a bit— now then, all nine of you
into my knapsack." Whisk! and they were all in; quick as Hghtning he fastened the bag and threw it into a comer.
Then all was quiet, and Brother Frolick laid himself down again
and slept till broad daylight, when the arrival of the landlord of the
inn and the nobleman to whom the castle belonged, woke him.
They were astonished to find him aHve and full of spirits, and said
to him, "Have you not seen any ghosts dming the night, and did
they not try to hurt you?"
"Well, not very much," answered Brother Frolick. "I have them
all nine quite safe in my knapsack there," and he pointed to the
comer. "You can dwell in your castle in peace now," he said to the
nobleman. "They will never trouble you again." The nobleman thanked the soldier and loaded him v^dth presents;
he also begged him to remain in his service, and promised to take
care of him for the remainder of his hfe. But the soldier said, "No; I have a roving disposition; I could never rest in one place. I wiU
go and travel farther."
Then Brother Frolick went to a smith's, and laying the knapsack containing the imps on the anvil, asked the smith and his man to
strike it with their great hammers, with all their strength. The imps
set up a loud screech, and when at last all was quiet, the knapsack
was opened. Eight of them were found quite dead, but the ninth,
who had laid himself in a fold, was still living. He slipped out when
the knapsack was opened and escaped.
Thereupon Brother FroHck traveled a long time about the world,
and those who know can tell many a tale about him. But at last he
grew old and thought of his end, so he went to a hermit who was
known to be a pious man, and said to him, "1 am tired of wander- ing about, and want now to behave in such a manner that I shall
enter into the kingdom of Heaven."
The hermit replied, "There are two roads: One is broad and pleasant, and leads to Hell; the other is narrow and rough, and
leads to Heaven."
"I should be a fool," thought Brother Frolick, "if I were to take
the narrow, rough road." So he set out and took the broad and pleasant road, and at length came to a great black door, which was the door of Hell.
Brother Frolick knocked, and the door-keeper peeped out to see
The Bright Sun Brings It to Light 411
who was there. But when he saw Brother Frolick, he was terrified,
for he was the very same ninth imp who had been shut up in the
knapsack and had escaped from it with a black eye. So he pushed
the bolt in again as quickly as he could, ran to the highest demon,
and said, "There is a fellow outside with a knapsack, who wants to
come in, but as you value your lives don't allow him to enter, or he will wish the whole of Hell into his knapsack. He once gave me a
frightful hammering when I was inside it." So they called out to Brother Frolick to go away again, for he should not get in therel
*lf they won't have me here," thought he, "I wiU see if I can find
a place for myself in Heaven, for I must stay somewhere." So he turned about and went onwards imtil he came to the door of
Heaven, where he knocked.
St. Peter was sitting hard by as door-keeper. Brother Frolick recognized him at once, and thought, "Here I find an old friend, I
shall get on better." But St. Peter said: "I can hardly believe that
you want to come into Heaven." "Let me in, brother; I must get in somewhere; if they would have taken me into Hell, I should not
have come here." "No," said St. Peter, "you shall not enter." "Then if you will not let me in, take your knapsack back, for I will have
nothing at all from you." "Give it here, then," said St. Peter. Then Brother Frolick gave him the knapsack into Heaven
through the bars, and St. Peter took it and himg it up beside his
seat. Then said Brother Frolick, "And now I wish myself inside my
knapsack," and in a second he was in it, and in Heaven, and St. Peter was forced to let him stay there.
The Bright Sun Brings It to Light
A tailor's apprentice was traveling about the world in search of work, and at one time he could find none, and his poverty was so
great that he had not a penny to five on. Presently he met a Jew on
the road, and as he thought he would have a great deal of money
about him, the tailor thrust God out of his heart, fell on the Jew,
and said, "Give me your money, or I will strike you dead." Then
said the Jew, "Grant me my fife, I have no money but eight pennies." But the tailor said, "Money you have, and it must be produced," and used violence and beat him until he was near death.
412 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
And when the Jew was dying, the last words he said were, 'The
bright sun will bring it to light," and thereupon he died.
The tailor's apprentice felt in his pockets and sought for money, but he found nothing but eight pennies, as the Jew had said. Then
he took him up and carried him behind a clump of trees, and went
onwards to seek work. After he had traveled about a long while, he
got work in a town with a master who had a pretty daughter, with
whom he fell in love, and he married her, and lived in good and
happy wedlock.
After a long time when he and his wife had two children, the
wife's father and mother died, and the young people kept house alone. One morning, when the husband was sitting at the table before the window, his wife brought him his coffee, and when he had
poured it out into the saucer, and was just going to drink, the sun
shone on it and the reflection gleamed hither and thither on the
wall above, and made circles on it. Then the tailor looked up and
said, "Yes, it would Hke very much to bring it to Hght, and cannotl"
The woman said, "Oh, dear husband, and what is that, then? What
do you mean by that?" He answered, "I must not teU you." But she
said, *Tf you love me, you must tell me," and used her most affec- tionate words, and said that no one should ever know it, and left
him no rest.
Then he told her how years ago, when he was traveling about
seeking work and quite worn out and peimiless, he had killed a
Jew, and that in the last agonies of death, the Jew had spoken the
words, "The bright sun will bring it to Hght." And now, the sim had just wanted to bring it to Hght, and had gleamed and made circles
on the wall, but had not been able to do it. After this, he again
charged her particularly never to tell this, or he would lose his Hfe,
and she did promise.
When, however, he had sat down to work again, she went to her
great friend and confided the story to her, but she was never to
repeat it to any human being, but before two days were over, the
whole town knew it, and the tailor was brought to trial, and condemned. And thus, after all, the bright sun did bring it to Hght.
The Sparrow and His Four Children
A SPARROW had four young ones in a swallow's nest. When they were fledged, some naughty boys pulled out the nest, but fortunately all the birds got safely away in the high wind. Then the old
bird was grieved that as his sons had all gone out into the world, he
had not first warned them of every kind of danger, and given them
good instruction how to deal with each. In the autumn a great
many sparrows assembled together in a wheatfield, and there the
old bird met his four children again, and full of joy took them home
with him. "Ah, my dear sons, what pain I have been in about you all through the summer, because you got away in the wind without
my teaching; listen to my words, obey your father, and be well on
yoiu: guard. Little birds have to encounter great dangers I" Then he asked the eldest where he had spent the summer, and
how he had supported himself. "I stayed in the gardens, and
looked for caterpillars and small worms, until the cherries got ripe."
"Ah, my son," said the father, "tit-bits are not bad, but there is great risk about them; on that account take great care of yourself
henceforth, and particularly when people are going about the gardens who carry long green poles which are hollow inside and have
a little hole at the top." "Yes, father, but what if a Httle green leaf is
stuck over the hole with wax?" said the son. "Where have you seen
that?" "In a merchant's garden," said the youngster. "Oh, my son,
merchant folks are quick folks," said the father. "If you have been among the children of the world, you have learned worldly shiftiness enough; only see that you use it well, and do not be too
confident."
After this he asked the next, "Where have you passed your
time?" "At court," said the son. "Sparrows and silly little birds are of no use in that place— there one finds much gold, velvet, silk,
armor, harnesses, sparrow-hawks, screech-owls and hen-harriers;
keep to the horses' stable where they winnow oats, or thresh, and
then fortune may give you your daily grain of com in peace." "Yes,
father," said the son, "but when the stable-boys make traps and fix
their gins and snares in the straw, many a one is caught fast."
"Where have you seen that?" said the old bird. "At cotirt, among
414 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
the stable-boys." "Oh, my son, court boys are bad boys! If you have been to court and among the lords, and have left no feathers there,
you have learnt a fair amount, and will know very well how to go
about the world, but look around, for the wolves devour the wisest
dogs." The father examined the third also: "Where did you seek your fortune?" "I have broken up tubs and ropes on the cartroads and highways, and sometimes met with a grain of com or barley." "That is
indeed dainty fare," said the father, 'l3ut take care what you are about and look carefully around, especially when you see any one
stooping and about to pick up a stone; there is not much time to
stay then." "That is true," said the son, "but what if any one should carry a bit of rock, or ore, ready beforehand in his breast or
pocket?" "Where have you seen that?" "Among the mountaineers, dear father; when they go out, they generally take little bits of ore
with them." "Mountain folks are working folks, and clever folks. If you have been among mountain lads, you have seen and learnt
something, but when you go thither beware, for many a sparrow
has been brougTit to a bad end by a mountain boy."
At length the father came to the youngest son: "You, my dear chirping nestling, were always the silliest and weakest. Stay with
me. The world has many rough, wicked birds which have crooked
beaks and long claws, and lie in wait for poor little birds and swallow them. Keep with those of your own kind, and pick up Httle spiders and caterpillars from the trees, or the house, and then you will
live long in peace." "My dear father, he who feeds himself without injury to other people fares well, and no sparrow-hawk, eagle, or
kite will hurt him if he specially commits himself and his lawful
food, evening and morning, faithfully to God, who is the Creator
and Preserver of all forest and village birds, who likewise hears the
cry and prayer of the young ravens, for no sparrow or wren ever
falls to the ground except by his will." "Where have you learnt
this?" The son answered, "When the great blast of wind tore me away from you I came to a church, and there during the summer I
have picked up the flies and spiders from the windows, and heard
this discourse preached. The Father of all sparrows fed me all the
summer through, and kept me from all mischance and from ferocious birds."
"In sooth, my dear son, if you take refuge in the churches and help to clear away spiders and buzzing flies, and cry unto God Hke
the young ravens, and commend yoiu^self to the eternal Creator, all
The Duration of Life 415
will be well with you, even if the whole world were full of wild ma- licious birds.
"He who to God commits his ways. In silence suffers, waits, and prays.
Preserves his faith and conscience pure.
He is of Gods protection sure."
The Duration of Life
When God had created the world and was about to fix the length of
each creature's hfe, the ass came and asked, "Lord, how long shall
I live?" "Thirty years," replied God; "does that content thee?" "Ah,
Lord," answered the ass, "that is a long time. Think of my painful existence! To carry heavy burdens from morning to night, to drag
sacks of com to the mill, that others may eat bread, to be cheered
and refreshed with nothing but blows and kicks. Relieve me of a
portion of this long time." Then God had pity on him and reheved him of eighteen years.
The ass went away comforted, and the dog appeared. "How long
wouldst thou like to live?" said God to him. "Thirty years are too
many for the ass, but thou wilt be satisfied with that." "Lord," answered the dog, "is that Thy will? Consider how I shall have to run; my feet will never hold out so long, and when I have once lost
my voice for barking, and my teeth for biting, what will be left for
me to do but run from one corner to another and growl?" God saw that he was right, and released him from twelve years of life.
Then came the monkey. "Thou wilt certainly live thirty years
willingly," said the Lord to him. "Thou hast no need to work as the
ass and the dog have to do, and wilt always enjoy thyself." "Ahl
Lord," he answered, "it may seem as if that were the case, but it is quite different. When it reiins porridge I have no spoon. I am always to play merry pranks, and make faces which force people to
laugh, and if they give me an apple, and I bite into it, why it is sourl How often sadness hides itself behind mirth! I shall never be
able to hold out for thirty years." God was gracious and took off ten.
At last man appeared, joyous, healthy and vigorous, and begged
4i6 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
God to appoint his time for him. Thirty years shalt thou live," said
the Lord. "Is that enough for thee?" "What a short time," cried
man, "when I have built my house and my fire bums on my own hearth; when I have planted trees which blossom and bear fruit,
and am just intending to enjoy my life, I am to die 1 O Lord,
lengthen my time." "1 will add to it the ass's eighteen years," said
God. "That is not enough," replied the man. "Thou shalt also have
the dog's twelve years." "Still too Mttle!" "Well, then," said God, '1
will give thee the monkey's ten years also, but more thou shalt not
have." The man went away, but was not satisfied. So man lives seventy years. The first thirty are his human years,
which are soon gone; then is he healthy, merry, works with pleasure, and is glad of his life. Then follow the ass's eighteen years, when one burden after another is laid on him; he has to carry the
com which feeds others, and blows and kicks are the reward of his
faithful services. Then come the dog's twelve years, when he hes in the comer, and growls and has no longer any teeth to bite with,
and when this time is over the monkey's ten years form the end. Then man is weak-headed and fooHsh, does silly things, and becomes the jest of the children.
The Twelve Apostles
Three hundred years before the birth of the Lord Christ, there
lived a mother who had twelve sons, but was so poor and needy
that she no longer knew how she was to keep them alive at all. She
prayed to God daily that He would grant that all her sons might be
on the earth with the Redeemer who was promised. When her necessity became still greater she sent one of them after the other out into the world to seek bread for her.
The eldest was called Peter, and he went out and had already
walked a long way, a whole day's journey, when he came into a great forest. He sought for a way out, but could find none, and
went farther and farther astray, and at the same time felt such
great hunger that he could scarcely stand. At length he became so
weak that he was forced to lie down, and he believed death to be at
hand. Suddenly there stood beside him a small boy who shone with
brightness, and was as beautiful and kind as an angel. The child
Faithful John 417
smote his little hands together, until Peter was forced to look up
and saw him. Then the child said, "Why art thou sitting there in
such trouble?" "Alas!" answered Peter, "I am going about the world seeking bread. That I may yet see the dear Saviour who is
promised, that is my greatest desire." The child said, "Come with
me, and thy wish shall be fulfilled." He took poor Peter by the hand, and led him between some clifiFs
to a great cavern. When they entered it, everything was shining
with gold, silver, and crystal, and in the midst of it twelve cradles
were standing side by side. Then said the little angel, "Lie down in
the first, and sleep a while, I will rock thee." Peter did so, and the angel sang to him and rocked him until he was asleep. And when
he was asleep, the second brother came also, guided thither by his
guardian angel, and he was rocked to sleep like the first, and thus
came the others, one after the other, until all twelve lay there sleeping in the golden cradles. They slept, however, three hundred
years, until the night when the Savioiur of the world was bom.
Then they awoke, and were with him on earth, and were called the
twelve apostles.
Faithful John
Thebe was once an old King, who, having fallen sick, thought to
himself, "This is very likely my death-bed on which I am lying."
Then he said, "Let Faithful John be sent for." Faithful John was his best-beloved servant, and was so called because he had served the King faithfully all his life long. When he
came near the bed, the King said to him, "Faithful John, I feel my end drawing near, and my only care is for my son; he is yet of ten- der years, and does not always know how to shape his conduct; and
unless you promise me to instruct him in all his actions and be a
true foster-father to him, I shall not be able to close my eyes in
peace." Then answered Faithful John, "I will never forsake him, and will
serve him faithfully, even though it should cost me my life."
And the old King said, "Then I die, being of good cheer and at
peace." And he went on to say, "After my death, you must lead him through the whole castle, into all the chambers, halls, and vaults,
4i8 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
and show him the treasures that in them lie; but the last chamber
in the long gallery, in which lies hidden the picture of the Princess
of the Golden Palace, you must not show him. If he were to see
that picture, he would directly fall into so great a love for her, that
he would faint with the strength of it, and afterwards for her sake
run into great dangers; so you must guard him well." And as Faithful John gave him his hand upon it, the old King became still and silent, laid his head upon the pillow, and died.
When the old King was laid in the grave, Faithful John told the
young King what he had promised to his father on his death-bed,
and said, "And I will certainly hold to my promise and be faithful to you, as I was faithful to him, even though it should cost me my
Mfe." When the days of mourning were at an end, Faithful John said to
the Prince, *lt is now time that you should see your inheritance; I
will show you all the paternal castle." Then he led him over all the place, upstairs and downstairs, and
showed him all the treasinres and the splendid chambers; one chamber only he did not open, that in which the perilous picture hung.
Now the picture was so placed that when the door opened it was
the first thing to be seen, and was so wonderfully painted that it
seemed to breathe and move, and in the whole world was there
nothing more lovely or more beautiful.
The young King noticed how Faithful John always passed by this
one door, and asked, "Why do you not undo this door?" "There is
something inside that would terrify you," answered he.
But the King answered, "I have seen the whole castle, and I will
know what is in here also." And he went forward and tried to open the door by force.
Then Faithful John called him back, and said, "I promised your father on his death-bed that you should not see what is in that
room; it might bring great misfortune on you and me were I to
break my promise."
But the young King answered, "I shall be undone if I do not go inside that room; I shall have no peace day or night until I have
seen it with these eyes; and I will not move from this place until
you have unlocked it." Then Faithful John saw there was no help for it, and he chose
out the key from the big bunch with a heavy heart and many sighs.
When the door was opened he walked in first, and thought that by
standing in front of the King he might hide the picture from him,
but that was no good, the King stood on tiptoe, and looked over his
Faithful John 419
shoulder. And when he saw the image of the lady that was so wonderfully beautiful, and so glittering with gold and jewels, he fell on
the ground powerless. Faithful John helped him up, took him to his
bed, and thought with sorrow, "Ah mel the evil has come to pass; what will become of us?"
Then he strengthened the King with wine, until he came to himself. The first words that he said were, "Oh, the beautiful picture!
Whose portrait is it?" "It is the portrait of the Princess of the
Golden Palace," answered Faithful John.
Then the King said, "My love for her is so great that if all the leaves of the forest were tongues they could not utter it! I stake my
life on the chance of obtaining her, and you, my Faithful John,
must stand by me." The faithful servant considered for a long time how the business
should be begun; it seemed to him that it would be a difficult matter to come at just a sight of the Princess. At last he thought out a
way, and said to the King,
"All that she has about her is of gold— tables, chairs, dishes, drinldng-cups, bowls, and all the household furniture; in your treasury are five tons of gold, let the goldsmiths of yom* kingdom work it up into all kinds of vessels and implements, into all kinds of birds,
and wild creatures, and wonderful beasts, such as may please her;
then we will carry them oflF with us, and go and seek our fortime." The King had all the goldsmiths fetched, and they worked day
and night, until at last some splendid things were got ready. When
a ship had been loaded with them. Faithful John put on the garb of
a merchant, and so did the King, so as the more completely to disguise themselves. Then they journeyed over the sea, and went so
far that at last they came to the city where the Princess of the Golden Palace dwelt.
Faithful John told the King to stay in the ship, and to wait for
him. "Perhaps," said he, *T shall bring the Princess back with me, so take care that everything is in order; let the golden vessels be
placed about, and the whole ship be adorned." Then he gathered together in his apron some of the gold things,
one of each kind, landed, and went up to the royal castle. And
when he reached the courtyard of the castle there stood by the well
a pretty maiden, who had two golden pails in her hand, and she
was drawing water with them; and as she turned round to carry
them away she saw the strange man, and asked him who he was.
He answered, "I am a merchant," and opened his apron, and let her look within it.
420 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
"Ah, what beautiful things!" cried she, and setting down her pails, she turned the golden toys over, and looked at them one after another.
Then she said, "The Princess must see these; she takes so much
pleasure in gold things that she wiU buy them aU from you." Then she took him by the hand and led him in, for she was the chamber- maid.
When the Princess saw the golden wares she was very pleased,
and said, "All these are so finely worked that I should like to buy
them of you."
But the Faithful John said, "I am only the servant of a rich mer- chant, and what I have here is nothing to what my master has in
the ship— the cunningest and costliest things that ever were made of
gold." The Princess then wanted it all to be brought to her; but he said,
"That would take up many days; so great is the number of them, and so much space would they occupy that there would not be
enough room for them in your house."
But the Princess's curiosity and fancy grew so much that at last
she said, "Lead me to the ship; I will go and see your master's
treasures." Then Faithful John led her to the ship joyfully, and the King,
when he saw that her beauty was even greater than the picture had
set forth, felt his heart leap at the sight. Then she climbed up into
the ship, and the King received her. Faithful John stayed by the
steersman, and gave orders for the ship to push off, saying, "Spread
all sail, that she may fly like a bird in the air." So the King showed her all the golden things, each separately—
the dishes, the bowls, the birds, the wild creatures, and the wonderful beasts. Many hours were passed in looking at them all, and in
her pleasure the Princess never noticed that the ship was moving
onwards. When she had examined the last, she thanked the merchant, and prepared to return home; but when she came to the ship's side, she saw that they were on the high seas, far from land, and
speeding on imder full sail.
"Ahl" cried she, full of terror, 'T am betrayed and carried off by this merchant. Oh that I had died rather than have fallen into his
power!" But the King took hold of her hand, and said, "No merchant am I, but a King, and no baser of birth than thyself; it is because of my
over-mastering love for thee that I have carried thee off by cunning. The first time I saw thy picture I fell fainting to the earth."
Faithful John 421
When the Princess of the Golden Palace heard this she became
more trustful, and her heart inclined favorably towards him, so that
she willingly consented to become his wife.
It happened, however, as they were still journeying on the open
sea, that Faithful John, as he sat in the forepart of the ship and
made music, caught sight of three ravens in the air flying overhead.
Then he stopped playing, and Ustened to what they said one to another, for he understood them quite well. The first one cried, "Ay,
there goes the Princess of the Golden Palace."
"Yes," answered the second; "but he has not got her safe yet."
And the third said, "He has her, though; she sits beside him in
the ship."
Then the first one spoke again, "What does that avail him? When they come on land a fox-red horse will spring towards them; then
will the King try to mount him; and if he does, the horse will rise
with him into the air, so that he will never see his bride again."
The second raven asked, "Is there no remedy?"
"Oh yes; if another man mounts quickly, and takes the pistol out of the holster and shoots the horse dead with it, he will save the
young King. But who knows that? and he that knows it and does it
will become stone from toe to knee."
Then said the second, "I know further, that if the horse should be killed, the young King will not even then be smre of his bride.
When they arrive at the castle there will lie a wrought bride-shirt
in a dish, and it will seem all woven of gold and silver, but it is really of sulphur and pitch, and if he puts it on it will bmn him to the
marrow of his bones."
The third raven said, 'Is there no remedy?"
"Oh yes," answered the second; "if another man with gloves on picks up the shirt, and throws it into the fire, so that it is consmned,
then is the young King delivered. But what avails that? He who knows it and does it will be tiimed into stone from his heart to his
knee."
Then spoke the third, "I know yet more, that even when the bride-shirt is burnt up the King is not sure of his bride; when at the
wedding the dance begins, and the young Queen dances, she will
suddenly grow pale and fall to the earth as if she were dead, and
unless some one lifts her up and takes three drops of blood from
her right breast, she will die. But he that knows this and does this will become stone from the crown of his head to the sole of his
foot." When the ravens had spoken thus among themselves they flew
422 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
away. Faithful John had understood it all, and from that time he
remained quiet and sad, for he thought to himself that were he to
conceal what he had heard from his master, misfortune would befall; and were he to reveal it his own life would be sacrificed. At
last, however, he said within himself, "I will save my master, though
I myself should perish!" So when they came on land, it happened just as the ravens had
foretold, there sprang forward a splendid fox -red horse.
"Come on I" said the King, 'Tie shall carry me to the castle," and was going to mount, when Faithful John passed before him and
mounted quickly, drew the pistol out of the holster, and shot the horse dead.
Then the other servants of the King cried out (for they did not
wish well to Faithful John), "How shameful to kill that beautiful
animal that was to have carried the King to his castle." But the
King said, "Hold your tongues, and let him be; he is my Faithful
John; he knows what is the good of it." Then they went up to the castle, and there stood in the hall a
dish, and the wrought bride-shirt that lay on it seemed as if of gold
and silver. The young King went up to it and was going to put it
on, but Faithful John pushed him away, picked it up with his
gloved hands, threw it quickly on the fire, and there let it burn.
The other servants began grumbling again, and said, "Look, he is
even burning up the King's bridal shirt!" But the young King said,
"Who knows but that there may be a good reason for it? Let him
be, he is my Faithful John." Then the wedding feast was held; and the bride led the dance;
Faithful John watched her carefully, and all at once she grew pale
and fell down as if she were dead. Then he went quickly to her,
and carried her into a chamber hard by, laid her down, and kneeling, took three drops of blood from her right breast. Immediately
she drew breath again and raised herself up, but the young King
vwtnessing all, and not knowing why Faithful John had done this,
grew very angry, and cried out. "Tbrow liim into prison!" The next morning Faithful John was condemned to death and led
to the gallows, and as he stood there ready to suflFer, he said, "He who is about to die is permitted to speak once before his end; may
I claim that right?"
"Yes," answered the King, "it is granted to you."
Then said Faithful John, "I have been condemned imjustly, for I
have always been faithful," and he related how he had heard on the
Faithful John 423
sea voyage the talk of the ravens, and how he had done everything in order to save his master.
Then cried the King, "O my Faithful John, pardon! pardon! Lead
him down!" But Faithful John, as he spoke the last words, fell life- less, and became stone.
The King and Queen had great grief because of this, and the
King said, "Ah, how could I have evil-rewarded such faithfulness!" and he caused the stone image to be lifted up and put to stand in
his sleeping-room by the side of his bed. And as often as he saw it
he wept and said, "Would that I could bring thee back to hfe, my
Faithful John!" After some time the Queen bore twins— two little sons— that grew
and thrived, and were the joy of their parents. One day, when the
Queen was in church, the two children were sitting and playing
with their father, and he gazed at the stone image full of sadness,
sighed, and cried, "Oh that I could bring thee back to life, my
Faithful John!"
Then the stone began to speak, and said, "Yes, thou canst bring me back to life again, if thou wilt bestow therefor thy best-beloved."
Then cried the King, "All that I have in the world will I give up
for thee!"
The stone went on to say, 'If thou wilt cut off the heads of thy two children with thy own hand, and besmear me with their blood,
I shall receive life again." The King was horror-struck at the thought that he mvist put his
beloved children to death, but he remembered aU John's faith- fulness, and how he had died for him, and he drew his sword and
cut off his children's heads with his own hand.
And when he had besmeared the stone with their blood, life returned to it, and Faithful John stood alive and well before him; and
he said to the King, "Thy faithfulness shall not be unrewarded," and, taking up the heads of the children, he set them on again, and
besmeared the wounds with their blood, upon which in a moment
they were whole again, and jumped about, and went on playing as
if nothing had happened to them.
Now was the King full of joy; and when he saw the Queen com- ing he put the Faithful John and the two children in a great chest.
When she came in he said to her, "Hast thou prayed in church?"
"Yes," answered she, 'T^ut I was thinking all the while of Faithful
John, and how he came to such great misfortune through us."
424 Grimin*s Complete Fairy Tales
"Then," said he, "dear wife, we can give him life again, but it
will cost us both our little sons, whom we must sacrifice."
The Queen grew pale and sick at heart, but said, "We owe it
him, because of his great faithfulness." Then the King rejoiced because she thought as he did, and he went and unlocked the chest and took out the children and Faithful
John, and said, "God be praised, he is delivered, and our little sons
are ours again"; and he related to her how it had come to pass. After that they all Hved together happily to the end of their Hves.
The Six Swans
Once a King was hunting in a great wood, and he pursued a wild
animal so eagerly that none of his people could follow him. When
evening came he stood still, and looking round him he found that
he had lost his way; and seeking a path, he found none. Then all at
once he saw an old woman with a nodding head coming up to him; and it was a witch.
"My good woman," said he, "can you show me the way out of
the wood?"
"Oh yes, my lord King," answered she, "certainly I can; but I must make a condition, and if you do not fulfill it, you will never
get out of the wood again, but die there of hunger."
"What is the condition?" asked the King.
"I have a daughter," said the old woman, "who is as fair as any in the world, and if you will take her for your bride, and make her
Queen, I will show you the way out of the wood." The King consented, because of the difiBculty he was in, and the
old woman led him into her little house, and there her daughter
was sitting by the fire.
She received the King just as if she had been expecting him, and
though he saw that she was very beautiful, she did not please
him, and he could not look at her vidthout an inward shudder. Nevertheless, he took the maiden before him on his horse, and the old
woman showed him the way, and soon he was in his royal castle
again, where the wedding was held.
The King had been married before, and his first wife had left
seven children, six boys and one girl, whom he loved better than all
The Six Swans 425
the world, and as lie was afraid the step-mother might not behave well to them, and perhaps would do them some mischief, he took
them to a lonely castle standing in the middle of a wood. There
they remained hidden, for the road to it was so hard to find that the
King himself could not have found it, had it not been for a clew of
yarn, possessing wonderful properties, that a v^dse woman had
given him; when he threw it down before him, it unrolled itself and
showed him the way.
And the King went so often to see his dear children, that the
Queen was displeased at his absence; and she became curious and
wanted to know what he went out into the wood for so often alone.
She bribed his servants with much money, and they showed her the
secret, and told her of the clew of yarn, which alone could point
out the way; then she gave herself no rest until she had found out
where the King kept the clew, and then she made some Uttle white
silk shirts, and sewed a charm in each, as she had learned v^dtchcraft of her mother. And once when the King had ridden to the
hunt, she took the little shirts and went into the wood, and the clew
of yarn showed her the way. The children seeing some one in the
distance, thought it was their dear father coming to see them, and
came jumping for joy to meet him. Then the wicked Queen threw
one of the little shirts over each, and as soon as the shirts touched
their bodies, they were changed into swans, and flew away through
the wood. So the Queen went home very pleased to think she had
got rid of her step-children; but the maiden had not run out v^dth
her brothers, and so the Queen knew nothing about her.
The next day the King went to see his children, but he foimd
nobody but his daughter. "Where are thy brothers?" asked the King.
"Ah, dear father," answered she, "they are gone away and have
left me behind," and then she told him how she had seen from her window her brothers in the guise of swans fly away through the
wood, and she showed him the feathers which they had let fall
in the courtyard, and which she had picked up. The King was
grieved, but he never dreamt that it was the Queen who had done
this wicked deed, and as he feared lest the maiden also should be
stolen away from him, he wished to take her away with him. But
she was afraid of the step-mother, and begged the King to let her
remain one more night in the castle in the wood.
Then she said to herself, "I must stay here no longer, but go and
seek for my brothers." And when the night came, she fled away and went straight into
426 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
the wood. She went on all that night and the next day, until she
could go no longer for weariness. At last she saw a rude hut, and
she went in and found a room with six little beds in it; she did not
dare to lie down in one, but she crept under one and lay on the
hard boards and wished for night. When it was near the time of
sun-setting she heard a rustling sound, and saw six swans come flying in at the window. They alighted on the ground, and blew at
one another until they had blown all their feathers oflF, and then
they stripped off their swan-skin as if it had been a shirt. And the maiden looked at them and knew them for her brothers, and was
very glad, and crept from under the bed. The brothers were not
less glad when their sister appeared, but their joy did not last long.
"You must not stay here," said they to her; "this is a robbers' haunt, and if they were to come and find you here, they would kill
you." "And cannot you defend me?" asked the Httle sister.
"No," answered they, "for we can only get rid of our swan-skins and keep our human shape every evening for a quarter of an hour,
but after that we must be changed again into swans."
Their sister wept at hearing this, and said, "Can nothing be done
to set you free?"
"Oh no," answered they, "the work would be too hard for you. For six whole years you would be obliged never to speak or laugh,
and make during that time six little shirts out of aster-flowers. If
you were to let fall a single word before the work was ended, all
would be of no good." And just as the brothers had finished telling her this, the quarter
of an hour came to an end, and they changed into swans and flew out of the window.
But the maiden made up her mind to set her brothers free, even
though it should cost her her fife. She left the hut, and going into
the middle of the wood, she climbed a tree, and there passed the
night. The next morning she set to work and gathered asters and
began sewing them together: as for speaking, there was no one to
speak to, and as for laughing, she had no mind to it; so she sat on
and looked at nothing but her work.
When she had been going on like this for a long time, it happened that the King of that country went a-hunting in the wood, and some of his huntsmen came up to the tree in which the maiden
sat. They called out to her, saying, "Who art thou?" But she gave
no answer. "Come down," cried they; "we will do thee no harm." But she only shook her head. And when they tormented her further
The Six Swans 427
with questions she threw down to them her gold necklace, hoping
they could be content with that. But they would not leave off, so
she threw down to them her girdle, and when that was no good,
her garters, and one after another everything she had on and could
possibly spare, until she had nothing left but her smock. But aU was
no good, the huntsmen would not be put off any longer, and they
climbed the tree, carried the maiden off, and brought her to the
King.
The King asked, "Who art thou? What wert thou doing in the
tree?" But she answered nothing. He spoke to her in all the lan- guages he knew, but she remained dimib: but, being very beautiful, the King inclined to her, and he felt a great love rise up in his
heart towards her; and casting his mantle round her, he put her be- fore him on his horse and brought her to his castle. Then he caused
rich clothing to be put upon her, and her beauty shone as bright as
the morning, but no word would she utter. He seated her by his
side at table, and her modesty and gentle mien so pleased him, that
he said, "This maiden I choose for wife, and no other in all the
world," and accordingly after a few days they were married. But the King had a wicked mother, who was displeased with the
marriage, and spoke ill of the young Queen. "Who knows where
the maid can have come from?" said she, "and not able to speak a
wordl She is not worthy of a kingi" After a year had passed, and the Queen brought her first child
into the world, the old woman carried it away, and marked the
Queen's mouth with blood as she lay sleeping. Then she went to the King and declared that his wife was an eater of human flesh.
The King would not believe such a thing, and ordered that no one
should do her any harm. And the Queen went on quietly sevwng
the shirts and caring for nothing else.
The next time that a fine boy was bom, the wicked step-mother
used the same deceit, but the King would give no credence to her
words, for he said, "She is too tender and good to do any such thing, and if she were only not dimib, and could justify herself,
then her innocence would be as clear as day." When for the third time the old woman stole away the new-bom
child and accused the Queen, who was unable to say a word in her
defense, the King could do no other but give her up to justice, and
she was sentenced to suffer death by fire.
The day on which her sentence was to be carried out was the
very last one of the sixth year of the years during which she had
neither spoken nor laughed, to free her dear brothers from the evil
428 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
spell. The six shirts were ready, aU except one which wanted the
left sleeve. And when she was led to the pile of wood, she carried
the six shirts on her arm, and when she mounted the pile and the
fire was about to be kindled, all at once she cried out aloud, for
there were six swans coming flying through the air; and she saw
that her deliverance was near, and her heart beat for joy. The
swans came close up to her with rushing wings, and stooped round
her, so that she could throw the shirts over them; and when that
had been done the swan-skins fell ofiF them, and her brothers stood
before her in their own bodies quite safe and sound; but as one
shirt wanted the left sleeve, so the youngest brother had a swan's wing instead of a left arm.
They embraced and kissed each other, and the Queen went up to
the King, who looked on full of astonishment, and began to speak
to him and to say, 'T)earest husband, now I may dare to speak and
tell you that I am innocent, and have been falsely accused," and she related to him the treachery of the step-mother, who had taken
away the three children and hidden them. And she was reconciled
to the King with great joy, and the wicked step-mother was bound to the stake on the pile of wood and burnt to ashes.
And the King and Queen Uved many years with their six brothers
in peace and joy.
The Seven Ravens
A MAN had seven sons, but not a single daughter. This made both
him and his wife very unhappy. At last a daughter was bom, to
their great joy; but the child was very small and slight, and so weak
that they feared it would die. So the father sent his sons to the
spring to fetch water that he might baptize her.
Each of the boys ran in great haste to be the first to draw the
water for their little sister's baptism, but in the struggle to be first they let the pitcher fall into the well.
Then they stood still and knew not what to do; not one of them dared to venture home without the water. As the time went on and
they did not return, the father became very impatient, and said, "I suppose in the midst of their play they have forgotten what I sent
them for, the careless children." He was in such an agony lest the child should die unbaptized
The Seven Ravens 429
that he exclaimed thoughtlessly, "I wish the youngsters were all
turned into ravens I" The words were scarcely uttered when there was heard a rushing
of wings in the air over his head, and presently seven coal-black ravens flew over the house.
The father could not recall the dreadful words, and both parents
grieved terribly over the loss of their seven sons; their only consola- tion now was the little daughter, who every day grew stronger and more beautiful.
For a long time the maiden was not told that she had brothers;
her parents were most careful to avoid all mention of them. But one
day she overheard some persons talking, and they said that no
doubt the young girl was very beautiful, but that there must have
been some strange cause for the misfortxme which had happened to her seven brothers.
Oh, how surprised and sad she felt when she heard this! She
went at once to her father and mother and asked them if she really
had had any brothers, and what had become of them. Then her
parents dared not any longer keep the secret from her. They told
her, however, that it was the decree of Heaven, and that her birth was the innocent cause of all. As soon as she was alone she made a
firm determination that she would try to break the enchantment in which her brothers were held.
She had neither rest nor peace till she had made up her mind to
leave home and seek her brothers and set them free, cost what it
might.
When at last she left home, she took nothing with her but a little
ring, in memory of her parents, a loaf of bread, a jug of water, and
a little stool, in case she felt tired.
So she went from her home, and traveled further and further, till
she came to the end of the world, and there was the sun; but it was
so hot and fierce that it scorched the Httle child, and she ran away
in such a hurry that she ran into the moon. Here it was quite cold
and dismal, and she heard a voice say, "I smell man's flesh," which made her escape from the moon as quickly as she could, and at last she reached the stars.
They were very kind and friendly to her. Each of the stars was
seated on a wonderful chair, and the Morning Star stood up and
said, "If you have not a key you will not be able to unlock the iceberg in which your brothers are shut up." So the Morning Star gave the maiden the key, and told hef to
wrap it up carefully in her little handkerchief, and showed her the
430 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
way to the iceberg. When she arrived the gate was closed; she
opened her handkerchief to take out the key, but found it empty;
she had forgotten the advice of the kind stars. What was she to do
now? She wished to rescue her brothers and had no key to the ice- berg.
At last the good little sister thought she would put her finger into
the lock instead of a key. After twisting and tinning it about, which
hurt her very much, she happily succeeded in opening it, and im- mediately entered.
Presently a Httle dwarf came forward to meet her, and said, "My
child, what are you seeking?" '1 seek my brothers, the seven
ravens," she said. *Trhe seven ravens are not at home," replied the
dwarf; "but if you would Hke to wait here till they return, pray step
in." Then the little dwarf took the maiden to the room where supper
was prepared for the seven ravens, on seven little plates, by which
stood seven little cups of water.
So the sister ate a few crumbs from each plate and drank a httle
draught from each cup, and into the last cup she let fall the ring
that she brought from home.
Before she could get it out again she heard the rushing of wings
in the air, and the little dwarf said, "Here come the seven Mr.
Ravens flying home." Then she hid herself behind the door to see and hear what they
would do. They came in and were about to eat their supper, but as
they caught sight of their Uttle cups and plates, they said one to another: "Who has been eating from my httle plate?" "Who has been
drinking from my httle cup?" *Tt has been touched by the mouth of
a human being," cried one; "and, look here, what is this?" He took up his cup and turned it over, and out rolled the httle ring, which
they knew had once belonged to their father and mother.
Then said the eldest, "Oh, I remember that ringl Oh, if our sister
would only come here, we should be freel" The maiden, who heard the wish from behind the door, came forth smihng, and stood be- fore them.
In that same moment the seven ravens were freed from the enchantment, and became seven handsome young men. Oh, how joy- fully they aU kissed each other and their little sister, and started off
at once in great happiness to their parents and their homel
The Twelve Brothers
Once upon a time there lived a King and Queen very peacefully to- gether; they had twelve children, all boys.
Now the King said to the Queen one day, 'If our thirteenth child should be a girl the twelve boys shall die, so that her riches may be
the greater, and the kingdom fall to her alone." Then he caused twelve coflBns to be made; and they were jBlled
with shavings, and a Httle pillow laid in each, and they were
brought and put in a locked-up room; and the King gave the key to
the Queen, and told her to say nothing about it to any one.
But the mother sat the whole day sorrowing, so that her youngest
son, who never left her, and to whom she had given the Bible name
Benjamin, said to her, "Dear mother, why are you so sad?"
"Dearest child," answered she, "I dare not tell you." But he let her have no peace until she went and unlocked the
room, and showed him the twelve cofl&ns with the shavings and the
Httle pillows.
Then she said, "My dear Benjamin, your father has caused these coflBns to be made for you and your eleven brothers, and if I bring
a little girl into the world you are all to be put to death together
and buried therein." And she wept as she spoke, and her Httle son
comforted her and said, "Weep not, dear mother, we will save ourselves and go far away."
Then she answered, "Yes, go with your eleven brothers out into the world, and let one of you always sit on the top of the highest
tree that can be found, and keep watch upon the tower of this castle. If a Httle son is bom I will put out a white flag, and then you
may safely venture back again; but if it is a Httle daughter I will
put out a red flag, and then flee away as fast as you can, and the
dear God watch over you. Every night will I arise and pray for you
—in winter that you may have a fii-e to warm yourselves by, and in
summer that you may not languish in the heat." After that, when she had given her sons her blessing, they went
away out into the wood. One after another kept watch, sitting on
the highest oak tree, looking towards the tower. When eleven days
had passed, and Benjamin's turn came, he saw a flag put out, but it was not white, but blood red, to wain them that they were to die.
432 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
When the brothers knew this they became angry, saying, "Shall we suffer death because of a girl! we swear to be revenged; wherever
we find a girl we will shed her blood." Then they went deeper into the wood; and in the middle, where
it was darkest, they foimd a little enchanted house, standing empty.
Then they said, **Here will we dwell; and you, Benjamin, the yoimgest and weakest, shall stay at home and keep house; we
others will go abroad and purvey food." Then they went into the wood and caught hares, wild roes, birds,
and pigeons, and whatever else is good to eat, and brought them to
Benjamin for him to cook and make ready to satisfy their hunger.
So they lived together in the little house for ten years, and the time
did not seem long.
By this time the Queen's Httle daughter was growing up; she had a land heart and a beautiful face, and a golden star on her fore- head.
Once when there was a great wash she saw among the clothes
twelve shirts, and she asked her mother, "Whose are these twelve
shirts? they are too small to be my father s." Then the mother answered with a sore heart, *T)ear child, they belong to your twelve
brothers." The little girl said, "Where are my twelve brothers? I
have never heard of them." And her mother answered, "God only
knows where they are wandering about in the world." Then she led the little girl to the secret room and unlocked it,
and showed her the twelve coflBns with the shavings and the little
pillows. "These coflfins," said she, "were intended for your twelve
brothers, but they went away far from home when you were bom," and she related how everything had come to pass. Then said the
little girl, "Dear mother, do not weep, I wiU go and seek my
brothers." So she took the twelve shirts and went far and wide in the great
forest. The day sped on, and in the evening she came to the enchanted house. She went in and found a youth, who asked,
"Whence do you come, and what do you want?" and he marveled at her beauty, her royal garments, and the star on her forehead.
Then she answered, "I am a King's daughter, and I seek my twelve brothers, and I will go everywhere under the blue sky until
I find them." And she showed him the twelve shirts which belonged
to them. Then Benjamin saw that it must be his sister, and said, "I
am Benjamin, your youngest brother." And she began weeping for joy, and Benjamin also, and they
kissed and cheered each other with great love. After a while he
The Twelve Brothers 433
said, 'Dear sister, there is still a hindrance; we have sworn that any maiden that we meet must die, as it was because of a maiden that
we had to leave our kingdom."
Then she said, "1 wiU willingly die, if so I may benefit my twelve
brothers." "No," answered he, "you shall not die; sit down under this tub imtil the eleven brothers come, and I agree with them
about it." She did so; and as night came on they returned from himting, and supper was ready.
And as they were sitting at table and eating, they asked, "What
news?" And Benjamin said, "Don't you know any?" "No," answered
they. So he said, "You have been in the wood, and I have stayed at
home, and yet I know more than you." "Tell usl" cried they.
He answered, "Promise me that the first maiden we see shall not
be put to death." "Yes, we promise," cried they all, "she shall have
mercy; tell us now."
Then he said, "Our sister is here," and lifted up the tub, and the
King's daughter came forth in her royal garments with her golden star on her forehead, and she seemed so beautiful, delicate, and
sweet, that they all rejoiced, and fell on her neck and kissed her, and loved her with all their hearts.
After this she remained with Benjamin in the house and helped
him with the work. The others went forth into the woods to catch
wild animals, does, birds, and pigeons, for food for them all, and
their sister and Benjamin took care that all was made ready for
them. She fetched the wood for cooking, and the vegetables, and
watched the pots on the fire, so that supper was always ready
when the others came in. She kept also great order in the house,
and the beds were always beautifully white and clean, and the
brothers were contented, and lived in unity.
One day the two got ready a fine feast, and when they were all
assembled they sat down and ate and drank, and were full of joy.
Now there was a little garden belonging to the enchanted house,
in which grew twelve lilies; the maiden, thinking to please her
brothers, went out to gather the twelve flowers, meaning to give
one to each as they sat at meat. But as she broke off the flowers, in
the same moment the brothers were changed into twelve ravens,
and flew over the wood far away, and the house with the garden
also disappeared. So the poor maiden stood alone in the wild wood,
and as she was looking around her she saw an old woman standing
by her, who said, "My child, what hast thou done! why couldst thou not leave the twelve flowers standing? They were thy twelve
brothers, who are now changed to ravens forever."
434 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
The maiden said, weeping, "Is there no means of setting them
free?" "No," said the old woman, "there is in the whole world no way but one, and that is diflBcult; thou canst not release them but by
being dumb for seven years: thou must neither speak nor laugh;
and wert thou to speak one single word, and it wanted but one
hour of the seven years, all would be in vain, and thy brothers
would perish because of that one word."
Then the maiden said in her heart, "I am quite siu-e that I can set
my brothers free," and went and sought a tall tree, climbed up, and sat there spinning, and never spoke or laughed. Now it happened
that a King, who was hunting in the wood, had with him a large
greyhound, who ran to the tree where the maiden was, sprang up
at it, and barked loudly. Up came the King and saw the beautiful
Princess with the golden star on her forehead, and he was so
charmed with her beauty that he prayed her to become his wife.
She gave no answer, only a little nod of her head. Then he himself
climbed the tree and brought her down, set her on his horse and
took her home. The wedding was held with great splendor and rejoicing, but the bride neither spoke nor laughed.
After they had lived pleasantly together for a few years, the
King's mother, who was a wicked woman, began to slander the
young Queen, and said to the King, "She is only a low beggar-maid that you have taken to yourself; who knows what mean tricks she is
playing? Even if she is really dumb and cannot speak she might at
least laugh; not to laugh is the sign of a bad conscience." At first the King would beHeve nothing of it, but the old woman
talked so long, and suggested so many bad things, that he at last let
himself be persuaded, and condemned the Queen to death.
Now a great fire was kindled in the courtyard, and she was to be
burned in it; and the King stood above at the window, and watched
it all with weeping eyes, for he had held her very dear. And when
she was aheady fast bound to the stake, and the fire was Hcldng her
garments with red tongues, the last moment of the seven years
came to an end. Then a rushing sound was heard in the air, and
twelve ravens came flying and sank downwards; and as they
touched the earth they became her twelve brothers that she had
lost. They rushed through the fire and quenched the flames, and set
their dear sister free, kissing and consoHng her. And now that her
mouth was opened, and that she might venture to speak, she told
the King the reason of her dumbness, and why she had never
Iron John 435
laughed. The King rejoiced when he heard of her innocence, and
they all lived together in happiness until their death.
But the wicked mother-in-law was very unhappy, and died miserably.
Iron John
Once upon a time there lived a King who had a great forest near
his palace, full of all kinds of wild animals. One day he sent out a
huntsman to shoot him a roe, but he did not come back. "Perhaps
some accident has befallen him," said the King, and the next day he sent out two more huntsmen who were to search for him, but they
too stayed away. Then on the third day, he sent for all his huntsmen, and said, "Scour the whole forest through, and do not give up
until ye have found all three." But of these also, none came home again, and of the pack of hounds which they had taken with them,
none were seen more. From that time forth, no one would any
longer venture into the forest, and it lay there in deep stillness and
sohtude, and nothing was seen of it, but sometimes an eagle or a
hawk flying over it.
This lasted for many years, when a strange huntsman announced
himself to the King as seeking a situation, and offered to go into the
dangerous forest. The King, however, would not give his consent,
and said, 'It is not safe in there; I fear it would fare wdth thee no better than with the others, and thou wouldst never come out
again." The huntsman replied, "Lord, I vvdll ventrue it at my own
risk; I have no fear." The huntsman therefore betook himself with his dog to the forest. It was not long before the dog fell in with some game on the
way, and wanted to pursue it; but hardly had the dog run two steps
when it stood before a deep pool, could go no farther, and a naked
arm stretched itself out of the water, seized it, and drew it under.
When the huntsman saw that, he went back and fetched three men
to come wdth buckets and bail out the water. When they could see
to the bottom there lay a wdld man whose body was brown like
rusty iron, and whose hair hung over his face down to kis knees.
They bound him with cords, and led him away to the castle. There
was great astonishment over the wild man; the King, however, had
436 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
him put in an iron cage in his court-yard, and forbade the door to
be opened on pain of death, and the Queen herself was to take the
key into her keeping. And from this time forth every one could
again go into the forest with safety.
The King had a son eight years old, who was once playing in the
court-yard, and while he was playing, his golden ball fell into the
cage. The boy ran thither and said, "Give me my ball." "Not till
thou hast opened the door for me," answered the man. "No," said
the boy, "I will not do that; the King has forbidden it," and ran away. The next day he again went and asked for his ball; the wild
man said, "Open my door," but the boy would not. On the third day the King had ridden out hunting, and the boy went once more
and said, "1 cannot open the door even if I wished, for I have not
the key." Then the wild man said, "It Hes under thy mother's pillow, thou canst get it there." The boy, who wanted to have his ball back, cast all thought to the winds, and brought the key. The door
opened with diflBculty, and the boy pinched his fingers. When it
was open the wild man stepped out, gave him the golden ball, and
hurried away. The boy had become afraid; he called and cried after
him, "Oh, wild man, do not go away, or I shall be beateni" The wild man turned back, took him up, set him on his shoulder, and
went with hasty steps into the forest.
When the King came home, he observed the empty cage, and
asked the Queen how that had happened. She knew nothing about
it, and sought the key, but it was gone. She called the boy, but no
one answered. The King sent out people to seek for him in the
fields, but they did not find him. Then he could easily guess what
had happened, and much grief reigned in the royal court.
When the wild man had once more reached the dark forest, he
took the boy down from his shoulder, and said to him, "Thou wilt never see thy father and mother again, but I will keep thee vwth
me, for thou hast set me free, and I have compassion on thee. If
thou dost all I bid thee, thou shalt fare well. Of treasure and gold I
have enough, and more than any one in the world." He made a bed of moss for the boy on which he slept, and the next morning the
man took him to a well, and said, "Behold, the gold well is as bright and clear as crystal; thou shalt sit beside it, and take care that noth- ing falls into it, or it will be polluted. I wdll come every evening to
see if thou hast obeyed my order." The boy placed himself by the margin of the well, and often saw a golden fish or a golden snake
show itself therein, and took care that nothing fell in. As he was
thus sitting, his finger hiurt him so violently that he involuntarily
Iron John 437
put it in the water. He drew it quickly out again, but saw that it
was quite gilded, and whatsoever pains he took to wash the gold off
again, all was to no purpose.
In the evening Iron John came back, looked at the boy, and said,
"What has happened to the well?" "Nothing, nothing," he an- swered, and held his finger behind his back, that the man might not
see it. But he said, "Thou hast dipped thy finger into the water; this
time it may pass, but take care thou dost not let anything go in." By daybreak the boy was aheady sitting by the well and watching it.
His finger hurt him again and he passed it over his head, and then
unhappily a hair fell down into the well. He took it quickly out, but
it was already quite gilded. Iron John came, and aheady knew
what had happened. "Thou hast let a hair fall into the well," said
he. "I will aUow thee to watch by it once more, but if this happens for the third time then the well is polluted, and thou canst no
longer remain with me." On the third day, the boy sat by the well, and did not stir his
finger, however much it hurt him. But the time was long to him, and he looked at the reflection of his face on the surface of the
water. And as he still bent down more and more while he was
doing so, and trying to look straight into the eyes, his long hair fell
down from his shoulders into the water. He raised himself up
quickly, but the whole of the hair of his head was aheady golden
and shone Uke the sim. You may imagine how terrified the poor boy
wasl He took his pocket-handkerchief and tied it round his head, in
order that the man might not see it. When he came he aheady
knew everything, and said, "Take the handkerchief off." Then the golden hair streamed forth, and let the boy excuse himself as he
might, it was of no use. "Thou hast not stood the trial, and canst stay here no longer. Go forth into the world, there thou wilt learn
what poverty is. But as thou hast not a bad heart, and as I mean
well by thee, there is one thing I will grant thee; if thou fallest into
anv difficulty, come to the forest and cry, Iron John,' and then I will come and help thee. My power is great, greater than thou
thinkest, and I have gold and silver in abundance."
Then the King's son left the forest, and walked by beaten and un- beaten paths ever onwards until at length he reached a great city.
There he looked for work, but could find none, and he had learnt
nothing by which he could help himself. At length he went to the
palace, and asked if they would take him in. The people about
court did not at all know what use they could make of him, but
they Uked him, and told him to stay. At length the cook took him
438 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
into his service, and said he might carry food and water, and rake
the cinders together. Once when it so happened that no one else
was at hand, the cook ordered him to carry the food to the royal
table, but as he did not Hke to let his golden hair be seen, he kept
his little cap on.
Such a thing as that had never yet come imder the King's notice,
and he said, "When thou comest to the royal table thou must take
thy hat off." He answered, "Ah, Lord, I cannot; I have a bad sore
place on my head." Then the King had the cook called before him and scolded him, and asked how he could take such a boy as that
into his service, and that he was to tiurn him off at once. The cook,
however, had pity on him, and exchanged him for the gardener's boy.
Now the boy had to plant and water the garden, hoe and dig, and bear the wdnd and bad weather. Once in summer when he was
working alone in the garden, the day was so warm he took his little
cap off that the air might cool him. As the sun shone on his hair it
glittered and flashed so that the rays fell into the bed-room of the
King's daughter, and up she sprang to see what that could be. Then
she saw the boy, and cried to him, "Boy, bring me a wreath of
flowers." He put his cap on with all haste, and gathered wild field- flowers and bound them together. When he was ascending the
stairs with them, the gardener met him, and said, "How canst thou
take the King's daughter a garland of such common flowers? Go
quickly, and get another, and seek out the prettiest and rarest."
"Oh, no," replied the boy, "the vvdld ones have more scent, and wiW
please her better."
When he got into the room, the King's daughter said, "Take thy
cap off, it is not seemly to keep it on in my presence." He again
said, "I may not, I have a sore head." She, however, caught at his cap and pulled it off, and then his golden hair rolled down on his
shoulders, and it was splendid to behold. He wanted to run out, but
she held him by the arm, and gave him a handful of ducats. With
these he departed, but he cared nothing for the gold pieces. He
took them to the gardener, and said, "1 present them to thy children, they can play with them."
The follov^dng day the King's daughter again called to him that he was to bring her a vweath of field-flowers, and when he went in with it, she instantly snatched at his cap, and wanted to take it
away from him, but he held it fast wiih both hands. She again gave
him a handful of ducats, but he would not keep them, and gave
them to the gardener for playthings for his children. On the third
Iron John 439
day things went just the same; she could not get his cap away from
him, and he would not have her money.
Not long afterwards, the country was overrun by war. The King
gathered together his people, and did not know whether or not he
could offer any opposition to the enemy, who was superior in
strength and had a mighty army. Then said the gardener's boy, "I
am grown up, and will go to the wars also, only give me a horse."
The others laughed, and said, "Seek one for thyself when we are
gone, we will leave one behind us in the stable for thee." When they had gone forth, he went into the stable, and got the horse out;
it was lame of one foot, and limped hobblety jig, hobblety jig; nevertheless he mounted it, and rode away to the dark forest. When he
came to the outskirts, he called "Iron John" three times so loudly that it echoed through the trees. Thereupon the wild man appeared
immediately, and said, "What dost thou desire?" "I want a strong
steed, for I am going to the wars." "That thou shalt have, and still more than thou askest for." Then the wild man went back into the forest, and it was not long
before a stable-boy came out of it, who led a horse that snorted with its nostrils, and could hardly be restrained, and behind them
followed a great troop of soldiers entirely equipped in iron, and
their swords flashed in the sun. The youth made over his threelegged horse to the stable-boy, moimted the other, and rode at the
head of the soldiers. When he got near the battle-field a great part
of the King's men had already fallen, and little was wanting to make the rest give way. Then the youth galloped thither with his
iron soldiers, broke Hke a hiuricane over the enemy, and beat down
all who opposed him. They began to fly, but the youth pursued,
and never stopped, until there was not a single man left. Instead,
however, of returning to the King, he conducted his troop by byeways back to the forest, and called forth Iron John. "What dost
thou desire?" asked the wild man. "Take back thy horse and thy
troops, and give me my three-legged horse again." All that he asked was done, and soon he was riding on his three-legged horse.
When the King retiuned to his palace, his daughter went to meet
him, and wished him joy of his victory. "I am not the one who
carried away the victory," said he, "but a stranger knight who came
to my assistance with his soldiers." The daughter wanted to hear who the strange knight was, but the King did not know, and said,
"He followed the enemy, and I did not see him again." She in- quired of the gardener where his boy was, but he smiled, and said,
"He has just come home on his three-legged horse, and the others
44© Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
have been mocking him, and crying, 'Here comes our hobblety jig
back againl' They asked, too, 'Under what hedge hast thou been
lying sleeping all the time?' He, however, said, 'I did the best of all,
and it would have gone badly without me.' And then he was still
more ridiculed."
The King said to his daughter, "I will proclaim a great feast that shall last for three days, and thou shalt throw a golden apple. Perhaps the unknown will come to it." When the feast was announced,
the youth went out to the forest, and called Iron John. "What dost
thou desire?" asked he. "That I may catch the King's daughter's
golden apple." 'Tt is as safe as if thou hadst it already," said Iron
John. "Thou shalt likewise have a suit of red armor for the occasion, and ride on a spirited chestnut horse." When the day came, the youth galloped to the spot, took his place amongst the knights,
and was recognized by no one. The King's daughter came forward, and threw a golden apple to the knights, but none of them caught
it but he, only as soon as he had it he galloped away.
On the second day Iron John equipped him as a white knight,
and gave him a white horse. Again he was the only one who caught
the apple, and he did not Hnger an instant, but galloped off with it.
The King grew angry, and said, "That is not allowed; he must appear before me and teU his name." He gave the order that if the knight who caught the apple should go away again they should
pursue him, and if he did not come back willingly, they were to cut him down and stab him.
On the third day, he received from Iron John a suit of black
armor and a black horse, and again he caught the apple. But when
he was riding off with it, the King's attendants pursued him, and
one of them got so near him that he woimded the youth's leg with the point of his sword. The youth nevertheless escaped from them,
but his horse leapt so violently that the helmet fell from the youth's head, and they could see that he had golden hair. They rode back
and announced this to the King.
The following day the King's daughter asked the gardener about
his boy. "He is at work in the garden; the queer creature has been at the festival too, and only came home yesterday evening; he has
likewise shown my children three golden apples which he has
won." The King had him summoned into his presence, and he came and
again had his little cap on his head. But the King's daughter went up to him and took it off, and then his golden hair fell down over
his shoulders, and he was so handsome that all were amazed. "Art
The Kin^s Son Who Feared Nothing 441
thou the knight who came every day to the festival, always in
different colors, and who caught the three golden apples?" asked
the King. "Yes," answered he, "and here the apples are," and he
took them out of his pocket, and returned them to the King. 'If thou desirest further proof, thou mayest see the wound which thy
people gave me when they followed me. But I am likewise the
knight who helped thee to thy victory over thine enemies." "If thou
canst perform such deeds as that, thou art no gardener's boy; tell
me, who is thy father?" "My father is a mighty King, and gold have
I in plenty as great as I require." "I well see," said the King, "that I
owe thanks to thee; can I do anything to please thee?" "Yes," answered he, "that indeed thou canst. Give me thy daughter to wife."
The maiden laughed, and said, "He does not stand much on cer- emony, but I have already seen by his golden hair that he was no
gardener's boy," and then she went and kissed him. His father and mother came to the wedding, and were in great delight, for they
had given up all hope of ever seeing their dear son again. And as
they were sitting at the marriage-feast, the music suddenly stopped, the doors opened, and a stately King came in with a great retinue.
He went up to the youth, embraced him and said, "I am Iron John, and was by enchantment a wild man, but thou hast set me free; all
the treasures which I possess, shall be thy property."
The King's Son Who Feared Nothing
Once there was a King's son who was no longer content to stay at
home in his father's house. Since he had no fear of anything, he
thought, "1 will go forth into the wide world; there the time will
not seem long to me, and I shall see wonders enough." So he took leave of his parents, and went forth, and on and on from morning
till night, and whichever way his path led it was the same to him.
It came to pass that he got to the house of a giant, and as he was
so tired he sat down by the door and rested. And as he let his eyes
roam here and there, he saw the giant's playthings lying in the yard. These were a couple of enormous balls, and nine-pins as tall
as a man. After a while he had a fancy to set the nine-pins up and then rolled the balls at them, and screamed and cried out when the
nine-pins fell, and had a merry time of it.
442 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
The giant heard the noise, stretched his head out of the window,
and saw a man who was not taller than other men, and yet played
with his nine-pins. 'Xiittle worm," cried he, "why art thou playing
with my balls? Who gave thee strength to do it?" The King's son
looked up, saw the giant, and said, "Oh, thou blockhead, thou thinkest indeed that thou only hast strong arms. I can do everything I want to do." The giant came down and watched the bowling with great admiration, and said, "Child of man, if thou art one of that land, go and
bring me an apple of the tree of hfe." "What dost thou want with
it?" said the King's son. "I do not want the apple for myself," answered the giant, "but I have a betrothed bride who wishes for it. I
have traveled far about the world and cannot find the tree." "I will
soon find it," said the King's son, "and I do not know what is to
prevent me from getting the apple down."
The giant said, "Thou really believest it to be so easyl The gar- den in which the tree stands is surrounded by an iron railing, and
in front of the raiUng lie wild beasts, each close to the other, and
they keep watch and let no man go in." "They wiU be sure to let
me in," said the King's son. "Yes, but even if thou dost get into the garden, and seest the apple hanging to the tree, it is still not thine;
a ring hangs in front of it, through which any one who wants to
reach the apple and break it off, must put his hand, and no one has
yet had the luck to do it." "That luck will be mine," said the King's son.
Then he took leave of the giant, and went forth over mountain
and valley, and through plains and forests, until at length he came
to the wondrous garden.
The beasts lay round about it, but they had put their heads down
and were asleep. Moreover, they did not awake when he went up
to them, so he stepped over them, climbed the fence, and got safely
into the garden. There, in the very middle of it, stood the tree of
life, and the red apples were shining upon the branches. He
climbed up the trunk to the top, and as he was about to reach out
for an apple, he saw a ring hanging before it; but he thrust his
hand through that without any difficulty, and gathered the apple.
The ring closed tightly on his arm, and all at once he felt a prodi- gious strength flowing through his veins.
When he had come down again from the tree with the apple, he
would not climb over the fence, but grasped the great gate, and
had no need to shake it more than once before it sprang open with
a loud crash. Then he went out, and the Hon, which had been lying
The Kings Son Who Feared Nothing 443
down before, was awake and sprang after him, not in rage and
fierceness, but following him humbly as its master.
The King's son took the giant the apple he had promised him,
and said, "Seest thou, I have brought it without diflBculty." The giant was glad that his desire had been so soon satisfied, hastened
to his bride, and gave her the apple for which she had wished. She
was a beautiful and wise maiden, and as she did not see the ring on
his arm, she said, "I shall never believe that thou hast brought the
apple, until I see the ring on thine arm."
The giant said, "I have nothing to do but go home and fetch it," and thought it would be easy to take away by force from the weak
man what he would not give of his own free will. He therefore
demanded the ring from him, but the King's son refused it. "Where
the apple is, the ring must be also," said the giant; "if thou wilt not
give it of thine own accord, thou must fight with me for it." They wrestled with each other for a long time, but the giant
could not get the better of the King's son, who was strengthened by the magical power of the ring. Then the giant thought of a stratagem, and said, "I have got warm with fighting, and so hast thou. We
will bathe in the river, and cool ourselves before we begin again."
The King's son, who knew nothing of falsehood, went with him to the water, and pulled off with his clothes the ring also from his arm,
and sprang into the river. The giant instantly snatched the ring, and
ran away with it, but the Hon, which had observed the theft, pursued the giant, tore the ring out of his hand, and brought it back to
its master. Then the giant placed himself behind an oak tree, and
while the King's son was busy putting on his clothes again, sur- prised him, and put both his eyes out.
The unhappy King's son stood there, and was blind and knew not how to help himself. Then the giant came back to him, took him by
the hand as if he were some one who wanted to guide him, and led
him to the top of a high rock. There he left him standing, and
thought, "Just two steps more, and he will fall down and Idll himself, and I can take the ring from him." But the faithful lion had not deserted its master; it held him fast by the clothes, and drew him
gradually back again.
When the giant came and wanted to rob the dead man, he saw
that his cunning had been in vain. "Is there no way, then, of destroying a weak child of man Hke that?" said he angrily to himself,
and seized the King's son and led him back again to the precipice by another way, but the lion, which saw his evil design, helped its
444 Grimm*s Complete Fairy Tales
master out of danger here also. When they had got close to the
edge, the giant let the bHnd man's hand drop, and was going to leave him behind alone, but the lion pushed the giant so that he
was thrown down and fell, dashed to pieces, on the ground.
The faithful animal again drew its master back from the precipice, and guided him to a tree by which flowed a clear brook. The
King's son sat down there, but the Hon lay down, and sprinkled the water in his face with its paws. Scarcely had a couple of drops wetted the sockets of his eyes, than he was once more able to see something, and remarked a Kttle bird flying quite close by, which
wounded itself against the trunk of a tree. On this it went down to
the water and bathed itself therein, and then it soared upwards and
swept between the trees without touching them, as if it had recovered its sight again. Then the King's son recognized a sign from God and stooped down to the water, and washed and bathed his
face in it. And when he arose he had his eyes once more, brighter
and clearer than they had ever been.
The King's son thanked God for his great mercy, and traveled with his Hon onwards through the world. And it came to pass that
he arrived before a castle which was enchanted. In the gateway
stood a maiden of beautiful form and fine face, but she was quite
black. She spoke to him and said, "Ah, if thou couldst but deHver
me from the evil spell which is thrown over me." "What shall I
do?" said the King's son. The maiden answered, "Thou must pass three nights in the great hall of this enchanted castle, but thou must
let no fear enter thy heart. When they are doing their worst to torment thee, if thou bearest it without letting a sound escape thee, I
shall be free. Thy life they dare not take." Then said the King's son,
'1 have no fear; with God's help I will try it." So he went gaily into the castle, and when it grew dark he seated
himself in the large hall and waited. Everything was quiet, however, till midnight, when all at once a great tumult began, and out
of every hole and comer came Httle devils. They behaved as if they
did not see him, seated themselves in the middle of the room,
Hghted a fire, and began to gamble. When one of them lost, he said,
"It is not right; some one is here who does not belong to us; it is his
fault that I am losing." "Wait, you fellow behind the stove, I am
coming," said another. The screaming became still louder, so that
no one could have heard it without terror. The King's son stayed sitting quite quietly, and was not afraid; but at last the devils
jumped up from the ground, and fell on him, and there were so
The Kin^s Son Who Feared Nothing 445
many of them that he could not defend himself from them. They
dragged him about on the floor, pinched him, pricked him, beat
him, and tormented him, but no sound escaped from him.
Towards morning they disappeared, and he was so exhausted
that he could scarcely move his Umbs, but when day dawned the black maiden came to him. She bore in her hand a little bottle
wherein was the water of life wherewith she washed him, and he at
once felt all pain depart and new strength flow through his veins.
She said, "Thou hast held out successfully for one night, but two
more He before thee." Then she went away again, and as she was going, he observed that her feet had become white.
The next night the devils came and began their gambling anew.
They fell on the King's son, and beat him much more severely than the night before, until his body was covered vidth wounds. But as
he bore all quietly, they were forced to leave him, and when davm
appeared, the maiden came and healed him wath the water of life.
And when she went away, he saw with joy that she had already become white to the tips of her fingers.
Now he had only one night more to go through, but it was the
worst. The hobgoblins came again: "Art thou there still?" cried
they, "thou shalt be tormented till thy breath stops." They pricked him and beat him, and threw him here and there, and pulled him
by the arms and legs as if they wanted to tear him to pieces, but
he bore everything, and never uttered a cry. At last the devils
vanished, but he lay fainting there, and did not stir, nor could he
raise his eyes to look at the maiden who came in, and sprinkled and
bathed him with the water of life. But suddenly he was freed from
all pain, and felt fresh and healthy as if he had awakened from
sleep, and when he opened his eyes he saw the maiden standing by
him, snow-white, and fair as day. "Rise," said she, "and swing thy
sword three times over the stairs, and then all will be dehvered." And when he had done that, the whole castle was released from
enchantment, and the maiden was a rich King's daughter. The ser- vants came and said that the table was aheady set in the great hall,
and dinner served up. Then they sat dov^ni and ate and drank together, and in the evening the wedding was solemnized with great
rejoicings.
The Drummer
A YOUNG DRUMMER Went out alone one evening into the country,
and came to a lake on the shore of which he perceived three pieces
of white linen lying. "What fine hnen," said he, and put one piece in his pocket. He returned home, thought no more of what he had
found, and went to bed.
Just as he was going to sleep, it seemed to him as if some one
was saying his name. He listened, and was aware of a soft voice
which cried to him, "Drummer, drummer, wake up!" As it was a dark night he could see no one, but it appeared to him that a figure
was hovering about his bed. "What do you want?" he asked. "Give
me back my dress," answered the voice, "that you took away from
me last evening by the lake." "You shall have it back again," said
the drummer, "if you will tell me who you are." "Ah," replied the
voice, "I am the daughter of a mighty King; but I have fallen into the power of a witch, and am shut up on the glass-mountain. I have to bathe in the lake every day with my two sisters, but I cannot fly
back again without my dress. My sisters have gone away, but I
have been forced to stay behind. I entreat you to give me my dress
back." "Be easy, poor child," said the drummer. "I will wiUingly
give it back to you." He took it out of his pocket, and reached it to her in the dark.
She snatched it in haste, and wanted to go away with it. "Stop a
moment, perhaps I can help you." "You can only help me by as- cending the glass-mountain, and freeing me from the power of the
witch. But you cannot come to the glass-moimtain, and indeed if
you were quite close to it you could not ascend it." "When I want to
do a thing I always can do it," said the drummer; *1 am sorry for you, and have no fear of anything. But I do not know the way
which leads to the glass-mountain." "The road goes through the
great forest, in which the man-eaters live," she answered, "and
more than that, I dare not tell you." And then he heard her wings quiver, and she flew away.
By daybreak the drummer arose, buckled on his drum, and went
without fear straight into the forest. After he had walked for a
while without seeing any giants, he thought to himself, "1 must
waken up the sluggards," and he hung his dnrni before him, and
The Drummer 447
beat such a reveille that the birds flew out of the trees with loud
cries. It was not long before a giant who had been lying sleeping
among the giass, rose up, and was as tall as a fir tree.
"Wretch!" cried he; "what art thou drumming here for, and
wakening me out of my best sleep?" "I am drumming," he replied,
"because I want to show the way to many thousands who are following me." "What do they want in my forest?" demanded the
giant. "They want to put an end to thee, and cleanse the forest of
such a monster as thou artl" "Ohol" said the giant, "I will trample
you all to death like so many ants." "Dost thou think thou canst do
anything against us?" said the drummer; "if thou stoopest to take hold of one, he will jump away and hide himself; but when thou art
lying down and sleeping, they will come forth from every thicket,
and creep up to thee. Every one of them has a hammer of steel in
his belt, and with that they will beat in thy skull."
The giant grew angry and thought, "If I meddle with the crafty folk, it might turn out badly for me. I can strangle wolves and
bears, but I cannot protect myself from these earthworms." "Listen,
little fellow," said he; "go back again, and I v^all promise thee that for the futiure I will leave thee and thy comrades in peace, and if
there is anything else thou wishest for, tell me, for I am quite
willing to do something to please thee."
"Thou hast long legs," said the drummer, "and canst run quicker than I; carry me to the glass-mountain, and I will give my followers
a signal to go back, and they shall leave thee in peace this time."
"Come here, worm," said the giant; "seat thyself on my shoulder, I
will carry thee where thou wishest to be." The giant lifted him up,
and the drummer began to beat his drum up aloft to his heart's
delight. The giant thought, "That is the signal for the other people to turn back." After a while, a second giant was standing in the road, who took
the drummer from the first, and stuck him in his own button-hole.
The drummer laid hold of the button, which was as large as a dish,
held on by it, and looked merrily around. Then they came to a third
giant, who took him out of the button-hole, and set him on the rim of his hat. Then the drummer walked backwards and forwards up
above, and looked over the trees, and when he perceived a mountain in the blue distance, he thought, "That must be the glassmountain," and so it was. The giant only made two steps more, and they reached the foot of the mountain, when the giant put him
down. The drummer demanded to be put on the summit of the
448 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
glass-mountain, but the giant shook his head, growled something in his beard, and went back into the forest.
And now the poor drummer was standing before the mountain,
which was as high as if three mountains were piled on each other,
and at the same time as smooth as a looking-glass, and did not know how to get up it. He began to climb, but that was useless, for
he always slipped back again. "If one were a bird now," thought he; but what was the good of wishing, no wings grew for him.
While he was standing thus, not knowing what to do, he saw, not
far from him, two men who were struggling fiercely together. He
went up to them and saw that they were disputing about a saddle
which was lying on the ground before them, and which both of
them wanted to have. "What fools you are," said he, "to quarrel
about a saddle, when you have not a horse for it!" "The saddle is
worth fighting about," answered one of the men; "whosoever sits on it, and wishes himself in any place, even if it should be the very
end of the earth, gets there the instant he has uttered the wish. The
saddle belongs to us in common. It is my turn to ride on it, but that
other man will not let me do it." "I will soon decide the quarrel," said the drummer, and he went to a short distance and stuck a white
rod in the ground. Then he came back and said, "Now run to the
goal, and whoever gets there first, shall ride first." Both put them- selves into a trot; but hardly had they gone a couple of steps before
the drummer swung himself on the saddle, wished himself on the
glass-mountain, and before any one could turn round, he was there.
On the top of the mountain was a plain. There stood an old stone
house, and in front of the house lay a great fish-pond, but behind it
was a dark forest. He saw neither men nor animals, everything was
quiet; only the wind rustled among the trees, and the clouds moved
by quite close above his head. He went to the door and knocked.
When he had knocked for the third time, an old woman with a
brown face and red eyes opened the door. She had spectacles on
her long nose, and looked sharply at him; then she asked what he
wanted. "Entrance, food, and a bed for the night," replied the
drummer. "That thou shalt have," said the old woman, "if thou wilt
perform three services in return." "Why not?" he answered, "1 am
not afraid of any kind of work, however hard it may be." The old woman let him go in, and gave him some food and a
good bed at night. The next morning when he had had his sleep
out, she took a thimble from her wrinkled finger, reached it to the
drummer, and said, "Go to work now, and empty out the pond with this thimble; but thou must have it done before night, and
The Drummer 449
must have sought out all the fishes which are in the water and laid
them side by side, according to their kind and size." "That is
strange work," said the drummer, but he went to the pond, and began to empty it. He bailed the whole morning; but what can any
one do to a great lake with a thimble, even if he were to bail for a
thousand years?
When it was noon, he thought, "It is all useless, and whether I
work or not it will come to the same thing." So he gave it up and sat down. Then came a maiden out of the house who set a Httle
basket with food before him, and said, "What ails thee, that thou
sittest so sadly here?" He looked at her, and saw that she was
wondrously beautiful. "Ah," said he, "I cannot finish the first piece
of work, how will it be with the others? I came forth to seek a King's daughter who is said to dwell here, but I have not found her, and I
will go farther." "Stay here," said the maiden, "1 will help thee out of thy diflSculty. Thou art tired, lay thy head in my lap, and sleep.
When thou awakest again, thy work will be done." The drummer did not need to be told that twice. As soon as his eyes were shut,
she turned a wishing-ring and said, "Rise, water. Fishes, come out." Instantly the water rose on high like a white mist, and moved away
with the other clouds, and the fishes sprang on the shore and laid
themselves side by side each according to his size and kind.
When the drummer awoke, he saw with amazement that all was
done. But the maiden said, "One of the fish is not lying with those of its own Idnd, but quite alone; when the old woman comes tonight and sees that all she demanded has been done, she will ask
thee, What is this fish lying alone for?* Then throw the fish in her
face, and say, 'This one shall be for thee, old witch.'" In the eve- ning the witch came, and when she had put this question, he threw
the fish in her face. She behaved as if she did not remark it, and
said nothing, but looked at him with malicious eyes.
Next morning she said, "Yesterday it was too easy for thee, I must give thee harder work. Today thou must hew down the
whole of the forest, split the wood into logs, and pile them up, and
everything must be finished by the evening." She gave him an axe, a mallet, and two wedges. But the axe was made of lead, and the
mallet and wedges were of tin. When he began to cut, the edge of
the axe turned back, and the mallet and wedges were beaten out of
shape.
He did not know how to manage, but at mid-day the maiden
came once more with his dinner and comforted him. "Lay thy head
on my lap," said she, "and sleep; when thou awakest, thy work will
450 GrimrrCs Complete Fairy Tales
be done." She turned her wishing-ring, and in an instant the whole forest fell down with a crash, the wood split, and arranged itself in
heaps, and it seemed just as if unseen giants were finishing the
work. When he awoke, the maiden said, "Dost thou see that the wood is piled up and arranged, one bough alone remains; but when
the old woman comes this evening and asks thee about that bough,
give her a blow with it, and say, 'That is for thee, thou witch.' "
The old woman came, "Therel Thou seest how easy the work
was!" said she; "but for whom hast thou left that bough which is
lying there still?" "For thee, thou witch," he repHed, and gave her a blow with it. But she pretended not to feel it, laughed scornfully,
and said, "Early tomorrow morning thou shalt arrange all the wood
in one heap, set fire to it, and bum it." He rose at break of day, and began to pick up the wood, but how
can a single man get a whole forest together? The work made no
progress. The maiden, however, did not desert him in his need. She
brought him his food at noon, and when he had eaten, he laid his
head on her lap, and went to sleep. When he awoke, the entire pile
of wood was burning in one enormous flame, which stretched its
tongues out into the sky. "Listen to me," said the maiden, "when the witch comes, she wiU give thee all kinds of orders; do whatever
she asks thee without fear, and then she will not be able to get the
better of thee, but if thou art afraid, the fire will lay hold of thee,
and consume thee. At last when thou hast done everything, seize
her with both thy hands, and throw her into the midst of the fire." The maiden departed, and the old woman came sneaking up to
him. "Oh, I am cold," said she, "but that is a fire that bums; it warms my old bones for me, and does me good! But there is a log
lying there which won't bum, bring it out for me. When thou hast done that, thou art free, and mayst go where thou Hkest; come, go in
with a good will." The drummer did not reflect long; he sprang into the midst of the
flames, but they did not hurt him, and could not even singe a hair
of his head. He carried the log out, and laid it down. Hardly, how- ever, had the wood touched the earth than it was transformed, and
the beautiful maiden who had helped him in his need stood before
him, and by the silken and shining golden garments which she wore,
he knew right well that she was the King's daughter. But the old
woman laughed venomously, and said, "Thou thinkest thou hast her
safe, but thou hast not got her yet!" Just as she was about to fall on the maiden and take her away, the youth seized the old woman
The Drummer 451
with both his hands, raised her up on high, and threw her into the
jaws of the fire, which closed over her as if it were dehghted that the old witch was to be burnt.
Then the King's daughter looked at the drummer, and when she saw that he was a handsome youth and remembered how he had
risked his life to deliver her, she gave him her hand, and said, "Thou hast ventured everything for my sake, but I also will do everything
for thine. Promise to be true to me, and thou shalt be my husband.
We shall not want for riches, we shall have enough with what the
witch has gathered together here." She led him into the house, where there were chests and cofiFers crammed with the old woman's treas- ures. The maiden left the gold and silver where it was, and took only
the precious stones. She would not stay any longer on the glassmountain, so the drummer said to her, "Seat thyself by me on my
saddle, and then we will fly down Uke birds." "I do not Hke the old
saddle," said she, "I need only turn my wishing-ring and we shall be
at home." "Very well, then," answered the drummer, "then wish us in
front of the town-gate." In the twinkHng of an eye they were there,
but the drummer said, "I vidll just go to my parents and tell them
the news, wait for me outside here, I shall soon be back." "Ah,"
said the King's daughter, "I beg thee to be careful. On thy arrival do not Idss thy parents on the right cheek, or else thou wilt forget
everything, and I shall stay behind here outside, alone and deserted." "How can I forget thee?" said he, and promised her to come back very soon, and gave his hand upon it.
When he went into his father s house, he had changed so much
that no one knew who he was, for the three days which he had
passed on the glass-mountain had been three years. Then he made
himself known, and his parents fell on his neck with joy, and his
heart was so moved that he forgot what the maiden had said, and
kissed them on both cheeks. But when he had given them the kiss
on the right cheek, every thought of the King's daughter vanished from him. He emptied out his pockets, and laid handfuls of the
largest jewels on the table. The parents had not the least idea what
to do with the riches. Then the father built a magnificent castle all
surrounded by gardens, woods, and meadows as if a Prince were
going to live in it, and when it was ready, the mother said, "I have
found a maiden for thee, and the wedding shall be in three days." The son was content to do as his parents desired.
The poor King's daughter had stood for a long time vidthout the town waiting for the retiun of the yotmg man. When evening came,
she said, "He must certainly have kissed his parents on the right
452 GrimnCs Complete Fairy Tales
cheek, and has forgotten me." Her heart was full of sorrow, she wished herself into a solitary little hut in a forest, and would not return to her father's court. Every evening she went into the town
and passed the young man's house; he often saw her, but he no
longer knew her. At length she heard the people saying, "The wedding will take place tomorrow." Then she said, "I will try if I can win his heart back."
On the first day of the wedding ceremonies, she turned her wishing-ring, and said, "A dress as bright as the sun." Instantly the dress lay before her, and it was as bright as if it had been woven of
real sunbeams. When all the guests were assembled, she entered
the hall. Every one was amazed at the beautiful dress, and the
bride most of all, and as pretty dresses were the things she had
most delight in, she went to the stranger and asked if she would sell
it to her. "Not for money," she answered, 'Taut if I may pass the first night outside the door of the room where your betrothed
sleeps, I will give it up to you." The bride could not overcome her desire and consented, but she mixed a sleeping-draught with the
wine her betrothed took at night, which made him fall into a deep
sleep. When all had become quiet, the King's daughter crouched down by the door of the bedroom, opened it just a little, and cried,
"Drummer, drummer, I pray thee hear! Hast thou forgotten thou heldest me dear?
That on the glass-mountain we sat hour by hour?
That I rescued thy life from the witch's power? Didst thou not plight thy troth to me?
Drummer, drummer, harken to meF'
But it was all in vain, the drummer did not awake, and when morning dawned, the King's daughter was forced to go back again as she came.
On the second evening she turned her wishing-ring and said, "A
dress as silvery as the moon." When she appeared at the feast in the dress which was as soft as moonbeams, it again excited the desire
of the bride, and the King's daughter gave it to her for permission to pass the second night also, outside the door of the bedroom.
Then in the stillness of the night, she cried,
"Drummer, drummer, I pray thee hear! Hast thou forgotten thou heldest me dear?
That on the glass-mountain we sat hour by hour?
That I rescued ^hu life from the witch's power? Didst thou not pliaht thy troth to me?
Drummer, drummer, harken to me!"
The Drummer 453
But the drummer, who was stupefied with the sleeping-draught,
could not be aroused. Sadly next morning she went back to her hut
in the forest. But the people in the house had heard the lamentation of the stranger-maiden, and told the bridegroom about it. They
told him also that it was impossible that he could hear anything of
it, because the maiden he was going to marry had poured a sleepingdraught into his wine.
On the third evening, the King's daughter turned her wishingring, and said, "A dress glittering Hke the stars." When she showed herself therein at the feast, the bride was quite beside herself with
the splendor of the dress, which far surpassed the others, and she
said, "I must, and will have it." The maiden gave it as she had given the others for permission to spend the night outside the bridegroom's door. The bridegroom, however, did not drink the wine which was handed to him before he went to bed, but poured it
behind the bed, and when everything was quiet, he heard a sweet
voice which called to him,
"Drummer, drummer, I pray thee hear! Hast thou forgotten thou heldest me dear?
That on the glass-mountain we sat hour by hour?
That I rescued thy life from, the witch's power? Didst thou not plight thy troth to me?
Drummer, drummer, harken to me!"
Suddenly, his memory returned to him. "Ah," cried he, *liow can I have acted so imfaithfully; but the Idss which in the joy of my
heart I gave my parents, on the right cheek, that is to blame for it
all, that is what stupefied mel" He sprang up, took the King's
daughter by the hand, and led her to his parents' bed. 'This is my
true bride," said he; "if I marry the other, I shall do a great wrong." The parents, when they heard how everything had happened, gave
their consent. Then the lights in the hall were Hghted again, drums
and trmnpets were brought, friends and relations were invited to
come, and the real wedding was solemnized with great rejoicing.
The first bride received the beautiful dresses as a compensation,
and declared herself satisfied.
The Two Kings' Children
A KING had a little boy of whom it had been foretold that he should
be Idlled by a stag when he was sixteen years of age. When he had
reached that age the huntsmen once went hunting with him. In the
forest, the King's son was separated from the others, and all at once he saw a great stag which he wanted to shoot but could not hit. At
length he chased the stag so far that they were quite out of the forest, and then suddenly a great tall man was standing there instead
of the stag, and said, "It is weU that I have thee, I have aheady ruined six pairs of glass skates with running after thee, and have
not been able to get thee."
Then he took the King's son with him, and dragged him through a great lake to a great palace, and then he had to sit down to table
with him and eat something. When they had eaten something together the tall King said, "I have three daughters. Thou must keep watch over the eldest for one night, from nine in the evening till six
in the mornings and every time the clock strikes, I will come myself
and caU, and if thou then givest me no answer, tomorrow morning
thou shalt be put to death, but if thou always givest me an answer,
thou shalt have her to wife."
When the young folks went to the bed-room there stood a stone
image of St. Christopher, and the King's daughter said to it, "My
father will come at nine o'clock, and every hour till it strikes six;
when he calls, give him an answer instead of the King's son." Then the stone image of St. Christopher nodded its head quite quickly,
and then more and more slowly till at last it stood still.
The next morning the King said to him, "Thou hast done the business well, but I cannot give my daughter away; thou must now
watch a night by my second daughter, and then I will consider
with myself whether thou canst have my eldest daughter to wife,
but I shall come every hour myself, and when I call thee, answer
me, and if I call thee and thou dost not reply, thy blood shall flow." Then the Prince and the Princess went into the sleeping-room, and
there stood a still larger stone image of St. Christopher, and the
King's daughter said to it, "If my father calls, do thou answer him." Then the great stone image of St. Christopher again nodded its
head quite quickly and then more and more slowly, imtil at last it
The Two Kings Children 455
stood still again. And the King's son lay down on the threshold, put his hand under his head and slept.
The next morning the King said to him, 'Thou hast done the business really well, but I cannot give my daughter away; thou
must now watch a night by the youngest Princess, and then I will
consider with myself whether thou canst have my second daughter
to wife, but I shaU come every hour myself, and when I call thee
answer me, and if I call thee and thou answerest not, thy blood
shall flow for me."
Then they once more went to the sleeping-room together, and
there was a much greater and much taller image of St. Christopher
than the two first had been. The King's daughter said to it, "When
my father calls, do thou answer." Then the great tall stone image of St. Christopher nodded quite half an hour with its head, until at
length the head stood still again. And the King's son laid himself down on the threshold of the door and slept.
The next morning the King said, "Thou hast indeed watched well, but I cannot give thee my daughter now; I have a great forest,
if thou cuttest it down for me between six o'clock this morning and
six at night, I will think about it." Then he gave him a glass axe, a glass wedge, and a glass mallet. When he got into the wood, he
began at once to cut, but the axe broke in two, then he took the
wedge, and struck it once with the mallet, and it became as short and as small as sand. Then he was much troubled and beheved he
would have to die, and sat down and wept.
Now when it was noon the King said, "One of you girls must
take him something to eat." "No," said the two eldest, "we will not take it to him; the one by whom he last watched, can take him
something." Then the youngest was forced to go and take him something to eat. When she got into the forest, she asked him how
he was getting on. "Oh," said he, "I am getting on very badly."
Then she said he was to come and just eat a Uttle. "Nay," said he,
"I cannot do that, I shall still have to die, so I will eat no more." Then she spoke so kindly to him and begged him just to try, that he
came and ate something. When he had eaten something she said, "1
will comb thy hair a while, and then thou wilt feel happier." So she combed his hair, and he became weary and fell asleep,
and then she took her handkerchief and made a knot in it, and
struck it three times on the earth, and said, "Earth- workers, come
forth." In a moment, numbers of little earth-men came forth, and
asked what the King's daughter commanded. Then said she, 'In
three hours' time the great forest must be cut down, and the whole
456 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
of the wood Isdd in heaps." So the little earth-men went about and got together the whole of their kindred to help them with the work.
They began at once, and when the three hours were over, all was
done, and they came back to the King's daughter and told her so.
Then she took her white handkerchief again and said, "Earthworkers, go home." On this they all disappeared.
When the King's son awoke, he was delighted, and she said, "Come home when it has struck six o'clock." He did as she told
him, and then the King asked, "Hast thou made away with the forest?" "Yes," said the King's son. When they were sitting at table,
the King said, "I cannot yet give thee my daughter to wife, thou
must still do something more for her sake." So he asked what it was
to be, then. "I have a great fish-pond," said the Eling. "Thou must go to it tomorrow morning and clear it of all mud until it is as
bright as a mirror, and fill it with every land of fish." The next
morning the King gave him a glass shovel and said, "The fish-pond
must be done by six o'clock." So he went away, and when he came to the fish-pond he stuck his shovel in the mud and it broke in two, then he stuck his hoe in the mud, and broke it also. Then he was
much troubled.
At noon the youngest daughter brought him something to eat,
and asked him how he was getting on. So the King's son said every- thing was going very ill with him, and he would certainly have to
lose his head. "My tools have broken to pieces again." "Oh," said
she, "thou must just come and eat something, and then thou wilt be
in another frame of mind." "No," said he, "I cannot eat, I am far
too unhappy for thatl" Then she gave him many good words until at last he came and ate something. Then she combed his hair again,
and he fell asleep, so once more she took her handkerchief, tied a
knot in it, and struck the ground thrice with the knot, and said,
"Earth-workers, come forth." In a moment a great many little earth- men came and asked what she desired, and she told them that in
three hours' time, they must have the fish-pond entirely cleaned out, and it must be so clear that people could see themselves
reflected in it, and every kind of fish must be in it. The little earth- men went away and summoned all their kindred to help them, and
in two hours it was done. Then they returned to her and said, "We
have done as thou hast commanded." The King's daughter took the handkerchief and once more struck thrice on the ground with it,
and said, "Earth-workers, go home again." Then they all went away.
When the King's son awoke the fish-pond was done. Then the
The Two Kings* Children 457
King's daughter went away also, and told him that when it was six he was to come to the house. When he arrived at the house the
King asked, "Hast thou got the fish-pond done?" "Yes," said the
King's son. That was very good.
When they were again sitting at table the King said, "Thou hast certainly done the fish-pond, but I cannot give thee my daughter
yet; thou must just do one thing more." "What is that, then?" asked
the King's son. The King said he had a great mountain on which there was nothing but briars which must all be cut down, and at
the top of it the youth must build up a great castle, which must be
as strong as could be conceived, and all the furniture and fittings
belonging to a castle must be inside it. And when he arose next
morning the King gave him a glass axe and a glass gimlet with him,
and he was to have all done by six o'clock. As he was cutting down the first briar with the axe, it broke off short, and so small that the
pieces flew all round about, and he could not use the gimlet either.
Then he was quite miserable, and waited for his dearest to see if
she would not come and help him in his need.
When it was mid-day she came and brought him something to eat.
He went to meet her and told her all, and ate something, and let
her comb his hair and fell asleep. Then she once more took the knot
and struck the earth with it, and said, "Earth-workers, come forth!" Then came once again numbers of earth-men, and asked what her
desire was. Then said she, *ln the space of three hours you must cut down the whole of the briars, and a castle must be built on the
top of the mountain that must be as strong as any one could con- ceive, and all the furniture that pertains to a castle must be inside
it." They went away, and summoned their Idndred to help them and when the time was come, all was ready. Then they came to the
King's daughter and told her so, and the King's daughter took her handkerchief and struck thrice on the earth with it, and said,
"Earth-workers, go home," on which they all disappeared. When
therefore the King's son awoke and saw everything done, he was as happy as a bird in air.
When it had struck six, they went home together. Then said the
King, "Is the castle ready?" "Yes," said the King's son. When they
sat down to table, the King said, "1 cannot give away my yoimgest
daughter until the two eldest are married." Then the King's son and
the King's daughter were quite troubled, and the King's son had no
idea what to do. But he went by night to the King's daughter and ran away with her.
When they had got a little distance away, the King's daughter
458 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
peeped round and saw her father behind her. "Oh," said she,
"what are we to do? My father is behind us, and will take us back with him. I will at once change thee into a briar, and myself into a
rose, and I will shelter myself in the midst of the bush." When the father reached the place, there stood a briar with one rose on it;
then he was about to gather the rose, when the thorn came and
pricked his finger so that he was forced to go home again. His wife
asked why he had not brought their daughter back with him. So he
said he had nearly got up to her, but that all at once he had lost
sight of her, and a briar with one rose was growing on the spot.
Then said the Queen, "If thou hadst but gathered the rose, the
briar would have been forced to come too." So he went back again to fetch the rose, but in the meantime the two were already far
over the plain, and the King ran after them.
Then the daughter once more looked round and saw her father
coming, and said, "Oh, what shall we do now? I will instantly change thee into a church and myself into a priest, and I will stand
up in the pulpit, and preach." When the King got to the place, there stood a church, and in the pulpit was a priest preaching. So
he listened to the sermon, and then went home again.
Then the Queen asked why he had not brought their daughter
with him, and he said, "Nay, I ran a long time after her, and just as I thought I should soon overtake her, a church was standing there
and a priest was in the pulpit preaching." 'TThou shouldst just have
brought the priest," said his wife, "and then the chm*ch would soon
have come. It is no use to send thee, I must go there myself." When she had walked for some time, and could see the two in the distance, the King's daughter peeped round and saw her mother coming, and said, "Now we are undone, for my mother is coming her- self. I will immediately change thee into a fish-pond and myself
into a fish."
When the mother came to the place, there was a large fish-pond,
and in the midst of it a fish was leaping about and peeping out of
the water, and it was quite merry. She wanted to catch the fish, but
she could not. Then she was very angry, and drank up the whole
pond in order to catch the fish, but it made her so ill that she was
forced to vomit, and vomited the whole pond out again. Then she
cried, "I see very well that nothing can be done now," and said that now they might come back to her.
Then the King's daughter went back again, and the Queen gave
her daughter three walnuts, and said, "With these thou canst help
thyself when thou art in thy greatest need." So the young folks
The Two Kings' Children 459
went once more away together. And when they had walked quite
ten miles, they arrived at the castle from whence the King's son came, and close by it was a village. When they reached it, the
King's son said, "Stay here, my dearest, I wiU just go to the castle, and then v^ll I come with a carriage and vwth attendants to fetch
thee." When he got to the castle they all rejoiced greatly at having the
King's son back again, and he told them he had a bride who was now in the village, and they must go with the carriage to fetch her.
Then they harnessed the horses at once, and many attendants
seated themselves outside the carriage. When the King's son was about to get in, his mother gave him a Idss, and he forgot everything which had happened, and also what he was about to do. On
this his mother ordered the horses to be taken out of the carriage
again, and every one went back into the house. But the maiden sat
in the village and watched and watched, and thought he would
come and fetch her, but no one came.
Then the King's daughter took service in the mill which belonged to the castle, and was obKged to sit by the pond every afternoon
and clean the tubs. And the Queen came one day on foot from the
castle, and went walking by the pond, and saw the well-grown
maiden sitting there, and said, "What a fine strong girl that is! She
pleases me welll" Then she and all with her looked at the maid, but no one knew her. So a long time passed by during which the
maiden served the miller honorably and faithfully. In the meantime, the Queen had sought a wife for her son who came from
quite a distant part of the world. When the bride came, they were
at once to be married. And many people hurried together, all of
whom wanted to see everything. Then the girl said to the miller
that he might be so good as to give her leave to go also. So the
miller said, "Yes, do go there." When she was about to go, she opened one of the three walnuts,
and a beautiful dress lay inside it. She put it on, and went into the
church and stood by the altar. Suddenly came the bride and bridegroom, and seated themselves before the altar, and when the priest
was just going to bless them, the bride peeped half round and saw
the maiden standing there. Then she stood up again, and said she
would not be given away until she also had as beautiful a dress as
that lady there. So they went back to the house again, and sent to
ask the lady if she would sell that dress. No, she would not sell it,
but the bride might perhaps earn it. Then the bride asked her how
she was to do this. Then the maiden said if she might sleep one
460 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
night outside the King's son's door, the bride might have what she wanted. So the bride said, yes, she was to do that. But the servants
were ordered to give the King's son a sleeping-drink, and then the maiden laid herself down on the threshold and lamented all night
long. She had had the forest cut down for him, she had had the
fish-pond cleaned out for him, she had had the castle built for him,
she had changed him into a briar, and then into a church, and at
last into a fish-pond, and yet he had forgotten her so quickly. The
King's son did not hear one word of it, but the servants had been awakened, and had listened to it, and had not known what it could
mean.
The next morning when they were all up, the bride put on the
dress, and went away to the church with the bridegroom. In the
meantime the maiden opened the second walnut, and a still more
beautiful dress was inside it. She put it on, and went and stood by
the altar in the church, and everything happened as it had happened the time before. And the maiden again lay all night on the
threshold which led to the chamber of the King's son, and the ser- vant was once more to give him a sleeping-drink. The servant, however, went to him and gave him something to keep him awake, and
then the King's son went to bed, and the miller's maiden bemoaned herself as before on the threshold of the door, and told of all that
she had done. All this the King's son heard, and was sore troubled, and what was past came back to him. Then he wanted to go to her, but his mother had locked the door.
The next morning, however, he went at once to his beloved, and
told her everything which had happened to him, and prayed her
not to be angry with him for having forgotten her. Then the King's daughter opened the third walnut, and within it was a stiU more
magnificent dress, which she put on, and went with her bridegroom
to church, and numbers of children came who gave them flowers,
and offered them gay ribbons to bind about their feet, and they
were blessed by the priest, and had a merry wedding. But the false
mother and the bride had to depart. And the mouth of the person who last told all this is still warm.
The Iron Stove
In the days when wishing was still of some use, a King's son was bewitched by an old witch, and shut up in an iron stove in a forest.
There he passed many years, and no one could deliver him. Then a
King's daughter came into the forest, who had lost herself, and
could not find her father's kingdom again. After she had wandered about for nine days, she at length came to the iron stove. Then a
voice came forth from it, and asked her, "Whence comest thou, and
whither goest thou?" She answered, "I have lost my father's kingdom, and cannot get home again." Then a voice inside the iron stove
said, "I wdll help thee to get home again, and that indeed most swiftly, if thou wilt promise to do what I desire of thee. I am the
son of a far greater King than thy father, and I will marry thee."
Then was she afraid, and thought, "Good Heavens! What can I
do with an iron stove?" But as she much wished to get home to her
father, she promised to do as he desired. But he said, "Thou shalt return here, and bring a knife with thee, and scrape a hole in the
iron." Then he gave her a companion who walked near her, but did not speak, but in two hours he took her home; there was great joy
in the castle when the King's daughter came home, and the old King fell on her neck, and kissed her. She, however, was sorely
troubled, and said, "Dear father, what I have suffered! I should never have got home again from the great vwld forest, if I had not
come to an iron stove, but I have been forced to give my word that
I will go back to it, set it free, and marry it." Then the old King was so terrified that he all but fainted, for he
had but this one daughter. They therefore resolved they would
send, in her place, the miller's daughter, who was very beautiful. They took her there, gave her a knife, and said she was to scrape at
the iron stove. So she scraped at it for four-and-twenty hours, but
could not bring off the least morsel of it. When day daviTied, a
voice in the stove said, "It seems to me it is day outside." Then she
answered, 'Tt seems so to me too; I fancy I hear the noise of my father's mill."
"So thou art a miller's daughter! Then go thy way at once, and
let the King's daughter come here." Then she went away at once, and told the old King that the man outside there, would have none
462 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
of her— he wanted the King's daughter. They, however, still had a
swine-herd's daughter, who was even prettier than the miller's daughter, and they determined to give her a piece of gold to go to
the iron stove instead of the King's daughter. So she was taken thither, and she also had to scrape for four-and-twenty hours. She,
however, made nothing of it. When day broke, a voice inside the
stove cried, 'It seems to me it is day outside!" Then answered she,
"So it seems to me also; I fancy I hear my father's horn blowing."
"Then thou art a swine-herd's daughterl Go away at once, and
tell the King's daughter to come, and tell her all must be done as was promised, and if she does not come, everything in the kingdom
shall be ruined and destroyed, and not one stone be left standing
on another." When the King's daughter heard that she began to weep, but now there was nothing for it but to keep her promise. So
she took leave of her father, put a knife in her pocket, and went
forth to the iron stove in the forest. When she got there, she began
to scrape, and the iron gave way, and when two hours were over,
she had already scraped a small hole. Then she peeped in, and saw
a youth so handsome, and so brilliant with gold and with precious
jewels, that her very soul was deUghted. Now, therefore, she went
on scraping, and made the hole so large that he was able to get out.
Then said he, "Thou art mine, and I am thine; thou art my bride,
and hast released me." He wanted to take her away with him to his kingdom, but she entreated him to let her go once again to her father, and the King's son allowed her to do so, but she was not to say more to her father than three words, and then she was to come
back again. So she went home, but she spoke more than three
words, and instantly the iron stove disappeared, and was taken far
away over glass-moimtains and piercing swords; but the King's son was set free, and no longer shut up in it. After this she bade goodbye to her father, took some money with her, but not much, and
went back to the great forest, and looked for the iron stove, but it
was nowhere to be found. For nine days she sought it, and then her
hunger grew so great that she did not know what to do, for she
could no longer live.
When it was evening, she seated herself in a small tree, and
made up her mind to spend the night there, as she was afraid of
wild beasts. When midnight drew near she saw in the distance a
small light, and thought, "Ah, there I should be saved!" She got down from the tree, and went towards the light, but on the way she
prayed. Then she came to a little old house, and much grass had
grown all about it, and a small heap of wood lay in front of it. She
The Iron Stove 463
thought, "Ah, whither have I come," and peeped in through the window, but she saw nothing inside but toads, big and little, except
a table well covered with wine and roast meat, and the plates and
glasses were of silver. Then she took coiurage, and knocked at the
door. The fat toad cried,
"Little green waiting-maid. Waiting-maid with the limping leg. Little dog of the limping leg.
Hop hither and thither.
And quickly see who is without."
And a small toad came walking by and opened the door to her.
When she entered, they all bade her welcome, and she was forced
to sit down. They asked, "Where hast thou come from, and whither
art thou going?" Then she related all that had befallen her, and how because she had transgressed the order which had been given
her not to say more than three words, the stove, and the King's son also, had disappeared, and now she was about to seek him over hill
and dale until she found him. Then the old fat one said,
"Little green waiting-maid. Waiting-maid with the limping leg. Little dog of the limping leg.
Hop hither and thither.
And bring me the great box."
Then the little one went and brought the box. After this they
gave her meat and drink, and took her to a well-made bed, which
felt like silk and velvet, and she laid herself therein, in God's name, and slept. When morning came she arose, and the old toad gave
her three needles out of the great box which she was to take with
her; they would be needed by her, for she had to cross a high glassmountain, and go over three piercing swords and a great lake. If
she did all this she would get her lover back again. Then he gave
her three things, which she was to take the greatest care of, namely,
three large needles, a plough-wheel, and three nuts. With these she
traveled onwards, and when she came to the glass-mountain which
was so slippery, she stuck the three needles first behind her feet
and then before them, and so got over it, and when she was over it,
she hid them in a place which she marked carefully. After this she
came to the three piercing swords, and then she seated herself on
her plough-wheel, and rolled over them.
At last she arrived in front of a great lake, and when she had
464 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
crossed it, she came to a large and beautiful castle. She went in and
asked for a place; she was a poor girl, she said, and would like to
be hired. She knew, however, that the King's son whom she had released from the iron stove in the great forest was in the castle.
Then she was taken as a scullery-maid at low wages. But, already
the King's son had another maiden by his side whom he wanted to marry, for he thought that she had long been dead.
In the evening, when she had washed up and was done, she felt
in her pocket and found the three nuts which the old toad had
given her. She cracked one v^dth her teeth, and was going to eat the
kernel when lo and behold there was a stately royal garment in it!
But when the bride heard of this she came and asked for the dress,
and wanted to buy it, and said, 'It is not a dress for a servant- girl." But she said, no, she would not sell it, but if the bride would grant
her one thing she should have it, and that was, leave to sleep one
night in her bridegroom's chamber. The bride gave her permission because the dress was so pretty,
and she had never had one Hke it. When it was evening she said to
her bridegroom, "That silly girl wdll sleep in thy room." "If thou art
willing so am I," said he. She, however, gave him a glass of wine in which she had poured a sleeping-draught. So the bridegroom and
the scullery-maid went to sleep in the room, and he slept so soundly that she could not waken him.
She wept the whole night and cried, 'T set thee free when thou wert in an iron stove in the v^dld forest, I sought thee, and walked
over a glass-mountain, and three sharp swords, and a great lake before I found thee, and yet thou wilt not hear me I" The servants sat by the chamber-door, and heard how she thus
wept the whole night through, and in the morning they told it to
their lord. And the next evening when she had washed up, she
opened the second nut, and a far more beautiful dress was within
it, and when the bride beheld it, she v^dshed to buy that also. But
the girl would not take money, and begged that she might once
again sleep in the bridegroom's chamber. The bride, however, gave him a sleeping-drink, and he slept so soundly that he could hear
nothing. But the scullery-maid wept the whole night long, and
cried, "1 set thee free when thou wert in an iron stove in the wdld forest, I sought thee, and walked over a glass-mountain, and over
three sharp swords and a great lake before I found thee, and yet
thou wilt not hear me!"
The servants sat by the chamber-door and heard her weeping the
whole night through, and in the morning informed their lord of it.
The Singing, Soaring Lark 465
And on the third evening, when she had washed up, she opened the
third nut, and within it was a still more beautiful dress which was
stiff with pure gold. When the bride saw that she wanted to have it,
but the maiden only gave it up on condition that she might for the
third time sleep in the bridegroom's apartment. The King's son was, however, on his guard, and threw the sleeping-draught away. Now,
therefore, when she began to weep and to cry, "Dearest love, I set thee free when thou wert in the iron stove in the terrible wild forest," the King's son leapt up and said, "Thou art the true one, thou
art mine, and I am thine." Thereupon, while it was still night, he
got into a carriage with her, and they took away the false bride's clothes so that she could not get up.
When they came to the great lake, they sailed across it, and
when they reached the three sharp-cutting swords they seated
themselves on the plough-wheel, and when they got to the glassmountain they thrust the three needles in it, and so at length they
got to the little old house; but when they went inside that, it was a
great castle, and the toads were all disenchanted, and were King's children, and full of happiness. Then the wedding was celebrated,
and the King's son and the Princess remained in the castle, which was much larger than the castles of their fathers. As, however, the
old King grieved at being left alone, they fetched him away, and
brought him to live with them, and they had two kingdoms, and
lived in happy wedlock.
Let the mouse run;
My story's done.
The Singing, Soaring Lark
There was once a man who was about to set out on a long journey,
and on parting he asked his three daughters what he should bring
back with him for them. The eldest wished for pearls, the second
wished for diamonds, but the third said, "Dear father, I should like
a singing, soaring lark." The father said, "Yes, if I can get it, you
shall have it," kissed all three, and set out. When the time had come for him to be on his way home again,
he brought pearls and diamonds for the two eldest; but he had
466 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
sought everywhere in vain for a singing, soaring lark for the
youngest, and he was very unhappy about it, for she was his favorite child. His road lay through a forest, and in the midst of it was a
splendid castle, and near the castle stood a tree, but quite on the
top of the tree, he saw a singing, soaring lark. "Aha, you come just
at the right momenti" he said, quite deHghted, and called to his ser- vant to cKmb up and catch the little creature.
But as he approached the tree, a Hon leapt from beneath it, shook
himself, and roared till the leaves on the tree trembled. "He who
tries to steal my singing, soaring lark," he cried, "will I devour."
Then the man said, "I did not know that the bird belonged to tliee. I will make amends for the wrong I have done and ransom myself
with a large sum of money, only spare my Hfe." The Hon said,
"Nothing can save thee, unless thou wilt promise to give me for mine own what first meets thee on thy return home; but if thou wilt
do that, I will grant thee thy Hfe, and thou shalt have the bird for
thy daughter, into the bargain."
But the man hesitated and said, "That might be my youngest daughter, she loves me best, and always runs to meet me on my return home." The servant, however, was terrified and said, "Why should your daughter be the very one to meet you, it might as easily be a cat, or dog?" Then the man allowed himself to be per- suaded, took the singing, soaring lark, and promised to give the Hon whatsoever should first meet him on his return home.
When he reached home and entered his house, the first who met
him was no other than his youngest and dearest daughter, who
came running up, kissed and embraced him, and when she saw that
he had brought with him a singing, soaring lark, she was beside
herself with joy. The father, however, could not rejoice, but began
to weep, and said, "My dearest child, I have bought the Httle bird dear. In return for it, I have been obHged to promise thee to a savage Hon, and when he has thee he will tear thee in pieces and devoiu- thee," and he told her all, just as it had happened, and begged her not to go there, come what might. But she consoled him and
said, "Dearest father, indeed your promise must be fulfilled. I will
go thither and soften the Hon, so that I may return to thee safely." Next morning she had the road pointed out to her, took leave,
and went fearlessly out into the forest. The Hon, however, was an
enchanted Prince and was by day a Hon, and all his people were
Hons with him, but in the night they resumed their natural human
shapes. On her arrival she was kindly received and led into the cas- tle. When night came, the Hon turned into a handsome man, and
The Singing, Soaring Lark 467
their wedding was celebrated with great magnificence. They lived
happily together, remained awake at night, and slept in the day- time.
One day he came and said, "Tomorrow there is a feast in thy father's house, because thy eldest sister is to be married, and if thou
art inclined to go there, my Hons shall conduct thee." She said,
"Yes, I should very much like to see my father again," and went thither, accompanied by the lions. There was great joy when she arrived, for they had all believed that she had been torn in pieces by
the lion, and had long ceased to hve. But she told them what a
handsome husband she had, and how well off she was, remained
with them while the wedding-feast lasted, and then went back again to the forest.
When the second daughter was about to be married, and she was
again invited to the wedding, she said to the lion, "This time I will
not be alone, thou must come with me." The lion, however, said that it was too dangerous for him, for if when there a ray from a
burning candle fell on him, he would be changed into a dove, and
for seven years long would have to fly about with the doves. She
said, "Ah, but do come with me, I will take great care of thee, and
guard thee from all light." So they went away together, and took with them their little child as well. She had a chamber built there,
so strong and thick that no ray could pierce through it; in this he
was to shut himself up when the candles were Ht for the wedding- feast. But the door was made of green wood which warped and left a little crack which no one noticed.
The wedding was celebrated with magnificence, but when the
procession with all its candles and torches came back from church,
and passed by this apartment, a ray about the breadth of a hair fell
on the King's son, and when this ray touched him, he was trans- formed in an instant, and when she came in and looked for him, she
did not see him, but a white dove was sitting there. The dove said
to her, "For seven years must I fly about the world, but at every seventh step that thou takest I will let fall a drop of red blood and
a white feather, and these will show thee the way, and if thou
followest the trace thou canst release me." Thereupon the dove flew out at the door, and she followed him, and at every seventh step a
red drop of blood and a Httle white feather fell downi and showed
her the way.
So she went continually further and further in the vidde world,
never looking about her or resting, and the seven years were almost
past; then she rejoiced and thought that they would soon be deliv-
468 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
ered; and yet they were so far from iti Once when they were thus
moving onwards, no little feather and no drop of red blood fell, and
when she raised her eyes the dove had disappeared. And as she
thought to herself, "In this no man can help thee," she climbed up
to the sun, and said to him, "Thou shinest into every crevice, and
over every peak, hast not thou seen a white dove flying?" "No,"
said the sun, "I have seen none, but I present thee with a casket,
open it when thou art in sorest need." Then she thanked the sun, and went on until evening came and
the moon appeared; she then asked her, "Thou shinest the whole night through, and on every field and forest, hast thou not seen a
white dove flying?" "No," said the moon, "I have seen no dove, but
here I give thee an egg, break it when thou art in great need." She thanked the moon, and went on until the night wind came up and
blew on her, then she said to it, "Thou blowest over every tree and
under every leaf, hast thou not seen a white dove flying?" "No,"
said the night wind, "I have seen none, but I will ask the three
other winds, perhaps they have seen it." The east wind and the west wind came, and had seen nothing,
but the south wind said, "1 have seen the white dove, it has flown to the Red Sea; there it has become a lion again, for the seven years
are over, and the lion is there fighting with a dragon; the dragon,
however, is an enchanted Princess." The night wind then said to
her, "I will advise thee; go to the Red Sea, on the right bank are some tall reeds, count them, break off the eleventh, and strike the
dragon with it, then the lion will be able to subdue it, and both
then will regain their human form. After that, look round and thou
wilt see the griffin which is by the Red Sea; swing thyself, with thy
beloved, on to his back, and the bird wdll carry thee over the sea to thine own home. Here is a nut for thee, when thou art above the
center of the sea, let the nut fall, it will immediately shoot up, and
a tall nut tree will grow out of the water, on which the griffin may
rest; for if he cannot rest, he will not be strong enough to carry thee
across, and if thou forgettest to throw down the nut, he will let thee
fall into the sea." Then she went thither, dnd found everything as the night wind
had said. She counted the reeds by the sea, and cut off the eleventh, struck the dragon therewith, whereupon the lion overcame it, and immediately both of them regained their human shapes. But
when the Princess, who had before been the dragon, was delivered
from enchantment, she took the youth by the arm, seated herself on
the griffin, and carried him off with her.
The Singing, Soaring Lark 469
There stood the poor maiden who had wandered so far and was
again forsaken. She sat down and cried, but at last she took coinrage
and said, "Still I will go as far as the wind blows and as long as the
cock crows, until I find him," and she went forth by long, long roads, until at last she came to the castle where both of them were
living together. There she heard that soon a feast was to be held, in
which they would celebrate their wedding, but she said, "God still
helps me," and opened the casket that the sim had given her. A dress lay therein as brilliant as the sun itself. So she took it out and
put it on, and went up into the castle, and every one, even the
bride herself, looked at her with astonishment.
The dress pleased the bride so well that she thought it might do
for her wedding-dress, and asked if it was for sale. "Not for money
or land," answered she, "but for flesh and blood." The bride asked
her what she meant by that, then she said, "Let me sleep a night in
the chamber where the bridegroom sleeps." The bride would not, yet wanted very much to have the dress; at last she consented, but
the page was to give the Prince a sleeping-draught. When it was night, therefore, and the youth was already asleep,
she was led into the chamber; she seated herself on the bed and
said, "I have followed after thee for seven years. I have been to the sun and the moon, and the foiur winds, and have inquired for thee,
and have helped thee against the dragon; vidlt thou, then, quite forget me?" But the Prince slept so soundly that it only seemed to him as if the wind were whistling outside in the fir trees.
When therefore day broke, she was led out again, and had to
give up the golden dress. And as even that had been of no avail,
she was sad, went out into a meadow, sat down there, and wept.
While she was sitting there, she thought of the egg which the moon
had given her; she opened it, and there came out a clucking hen
with twelve diickens all of gold, and they ran about chirping, and
crept again under the old hen's wings; nothing more beautiful was ever seen in the worldl Then she arose, and drove them through the
meadow before her, until the bride looked out of the vidndow. The
Httle chickens pleased her so much that she immediately came
down and asked if they were for sale. "Not for money or land, but for flesh and blood; let me sleep another night in the chamber
where the bridegroom sleeps." The bride said, "Yes," intending to cheat her as on the former evening. But when the Prince went to
bed he asked the page what the murmuring and rustling in the
night had been. On this the page told all; that he had been forced
to give him a sleeping-draught, because a poor girl had slept se-
470 Grimwks Complete Fairy Tales
cretly in the chamber, and that he was to give him another that
night. The Prince said, "Pour out the draught by the bed-side." At night, she was again led in, and when she began to relate how
ill all had fared with her, he immediately recognized his beloved
wife by her voice, sprang up and cried, "Now I really am released! I have been as it were in a dream, for the strange Princess has bewitched me so that I have been compelled to forget thee, but God
has dehvered me from the spell at the right time." Then they both left the castle secretly in the night, for they feared the father of the
Princess, who was a sorcerer, and they seated themselves on the
griffin, which bore them across the Red Sea, and when they were in
the midst of it, she let fall the nut. Immediately a tall nut tree grew
up, whereon the bird rested, and then carried them home, where
they found their child, who had grown tall and beautifiil, and they
lived thenceforth happily until their death.
The Nixie of the Mill-Pond
Once upon a time there was a miller who lived with his wife in
great contentment. They had money and land, and their prosperity
increased year by year more and more. But ill-luck comes like a
thief in the night; as their wealth had increased so did it again
decrease, year by year, and at last the miller could hardly call the
mill in which he lived, his own. He was in great distress, and when
he lay down after his day's work, found no rest, but tossed about in his bed, full of care.
One morning he rose before daybreak and went out into the
open air, thinking that perhaps there his heart might become
lighter. As he was stepping over the mill-dam the first sunbeam was
just breaking forth, and he heard a rippling sound in the pond. He
turned round and perceived a beautiful woman, rising slowly out of
the water. Her long hair, which she was holding off her shoulders
with her soft hands, fell down on both sides, and covered her white
body. He soon saw that she was the Nixie of the Mill-pond, and in
his fright did not know whether he should run away or stay where
he was. But the nixie made her sweet voice heard, called him by his
name, and asked him why he was so sad. The miller was at first
struck dumb, but when he heard her speak so kindly, he took
The Nixie of the Mill-Pond 471
heart, and told her how he had formerly lived in wealth and happiness, but that now he was so poor that he did not know what to do.
"Be easy," answered the nixie, "I will make thee richer and happier than thou hast ever been before, only thou must promise to give me
the young thing which has just been bom in thy house."
"What else can that be," thought the miller, "but a young puppy
or kitten?" and he promised her what she desired. The nixie de- scended into the water again, and he hurried back to his mill, consoled and in good spirits. He had not yet reached it, when the
maid-servant came out of the house, and cried to him to rejoice, for
his wife had given birth to a little boy. The miller stood as if struck
by Hghtning; he saw very well that the cunning mbde had been
aware of it, and had cheated him. Hanging his head, he went up to
his wife's bed-side and when she said, "Why dost thou not rejoice
over the fine boy?" he told her what had befallen him, and what
land of a promise he had given to the nixie. "Of what use to me are
riches and prosperity?" he added, "if I am to lose my child; but
what can I do?" Even the relations, who had come thither to wish them joy, did not know what to say.
In the meantime prosperity again returned to the miller's house. All that he undertook succeeded, it was as if presses and coffers
filled themselves of their own accord, and as if money multiphed
nightly in the cupboards. It was not long before his wealth was
greater than it had ever been before. But he could not rejoice over
it untroubled, the bargain which he had made with the nixie tormented his soul. Whenever he passed the mill-pond, he feared she
might ascend and remind him of his debt. He never let the boy
himself go near the water. "Beware," he said to him, "if thou dost but touch the water, a hand will rise, seize thee, and draw thee
down." But as year after year went by and the nixie did not show herself again, the miller began to feel at ease.
The boy grew up to be a youth and was apprenticed to a hunts- man. When he had learnt everything, and had become an excellent
huntsman, the lord of the village took him into his service. In the
village lived a beautiful and true-hearted maiden, who pleased the
huntsman, and when his master perceived that, he gave him a Httle
house, the two were married, lived peacefully and happily, and loved each other with all their hearts.
One day the huntsman was chasing a roe; and when the animal
turned aside from the forest into the open country, he pursued it
and at last. shot it. He did not notice that he was now in the neighborhood of the dangerous mill-pond, and went, after he had disem-
^fT. Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
bowelled the stag, to the water, in order to wash his blood-stained
hands. Scarcely, however, had he dipped them in than the nixie ascended, smihngly woimd her dripping arms around him, and drew
him quickly down under the waves, which closed over him.
When it was evening, and the himtsman did not return home, his
wife became alarmed. She went out to seek him, and as he had
often told her that he had to be on his guard against the snares of
the nixie and dared not venture into the neighborhood of the millpond, she already suspected what had happened. She hastened to
the water, and when she found his hunting-pouch lying on the
shore, she could no longer have any doubt of the misfortune. Lamenting her sorrow, and wringing her hands, she called on her be- loved by name, but in vain. She hurried across to the other side of
the pond, and called him anew; she reviled the nixie with harsh
words, but no answer followed. The surface of the water remained
calm, only the crescent moon stared steadily back at her. The poor
woman did not leave the pond. With hasty steps, she paced round
and round it, without resting a moment, sometimes in silence,
sometimes uttering a loud cry, sometimes softly sobbing. At last her
strength came to an end, she sank down to the ground and fell into
a heavy sleep.
Presently a dream took possession of her. She was anxiously
climbing upwards between great masses of rock; thorns and briars
caught her feet, the rain beat in her face, and the wind tossed her
long hair about. When she had reached the summit, quite a
different sight presented itself to her; the sky was blue, the air soft,
the ground sloped gently downwards, and on a green meadow, gay
with flowers of every color, stood a pretty cottage. She went up to
it and opened the door; there sat an old woman with white hair,
who beckoned to her kindly.
At that very moment, the poor woman awoke, day had already
dawned, and she at once resolved to act in accordance with her
dream. She laboriously climbed the mountain; everything was exactly as she had seen it in the night. The old woman received her
kindly, and pointed out a chair on which she might sit. 'Thou must
have met with a misfortune," she said, "since thou hast sought out
my lonely cottage." With tears, the woman related what had befallen her. "Be comforted," said the old woman. "T will help thee. Here is a golden comb for thee. Tarry till the full moon has risen,
then go to the mill-pond, seat thyself on the shore, and comb thy
long black hair with this comb. When thou hast done, lay it down
on the bank, and thou wilt see what wiU happen."
The Nixie of the Mill-Pond 473
The woman returned home, but the time till the full moon came,
passed slowly. At last the shining disc appeared in the heavens,
then she went out to the mill-pond, sat down and combed her long
black hair with the golden comb, and when she had finished, she
laid it down at the water's edge. It was not long before there was a movement in the depths, a wave rose, rolled to the shore, and bore
the comb away with it. In not more than the time necessary for the
comb to sink to the bottom, the siirface of the water parted, and the
head of the huntsman arose. He did not speak, but looked at his
wife with sorrowful glances. At the same instant, a second wave
came rushing up, and covered the man's head. All had vanished, the mill-pond lay peaceful as before, and nothing but the face of the full moon shone on it.
Full of sorrow, the woman went back, but again the dream
showed her the cottage of the old woman. Next morning she again
set out and complained of her woes to the wise woman. The old
woman gave her a golden flute, and said, "Tarry till the full moon comes again, then take this flute; play a beautiful air on it, and
when thou hast finished, lay it on the sand; then thou wilt see what
will happen." The wife did as the old woman told her. No sooner was the flute lying on the sand than there was a stirring in the
depths, and a wave rushed up and bore the flute away with it. Immediately afterwards the water parted, and not only the head of
the man, but half of his body also arose. He stretched out his arms
longingly towards her, but a second wave came up, covered him,
and drew him down again. "Alas, what does it profit me?" said the
unhappy woman, "that I should see my beloved, only to lose him
again!" Despair filled her heart anew, but the dream led her a third time
to the house of the old woman. She set out, and the wise woman
gave her a golden spinning-wheel, consoled her and said, "All is not yet fulfilled, tarry until the time of the full moon, then take the
spinning-wheel, seat thyself on the shore, and spin the spool fvdl,
and when thou hast done that, place the spinning-wheel near the
water, and thou wilt see what will happen." The woman obeyed all she said exactly; as soon as the fuU moon showed itself, she carried
the golden spinning-wheel to the shore, and spun industriously
until the flax came to an end, and the spool was quite filled with
the threads. No sooner was the wheel standing on the shore than
there was a more violent movement than before in the depths of
the pond, and a mighty wave rushed up, and bore the wheel away
with it. Immediately the head and the whole body of the man rose
474 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
into the air, in a water-spout. He quickly sprang to the shore,
caught his wife by the hand and fled. But they had scarcely gone a
very little distance, when the whole pond rose with a frightful roar,
and streamed out over the open coimtry. The fugitives already saw
death before their eyes, when the woman in her terror implored the
help of the old woman, and in an instant they were transformed,
she into a toad, he into a frog. The flood which had overtaken them
could not destroy them, but it tore them apart and carried them far
away.
When the water had dispersed and they both touched dry land
again, they regained their human form, but neither knew where the
other was; they found themselves among strange people, who did
not know their native land. High mountains and deep valleys lay
between them. In order to keep themselves aHve, they were both
obliged to tend sheep. For many long years they drove their flocks
through field and forest and were full of sorrow and longing. When
spring had once more broken forth on the earth, they both went out
one day with their flocks, and as chance would have it, they drew
near each other. They met in a valley, but did not recognize each
other; yet they rejoiced that they were no longer so lonely. Henceforth they each day drove their flocks to the same place; they did
not speak much, but they felt comforted.
One evening when the full moon was shining in the sky, and the
sheep were aheady at rest, the shepherd pulled the flute out of his
pocket, and played on it a beautiful but sorrowful air. When he had
finished he saw that the shepherdess was weeping bitterly. "Why
are thou weeping?" he asked. "Alas," answered she, "thus shone the full moon when I played this air on the flute for the last time, and
the head of my beloved rose out of the water." He looked at her, and it seemed as if a veil fell from his eyes, and he recognized his
dear wife, and when she looked at him, and the moon shone in his
face she knew him also. They embraced and kissed each other, and
no one need ask if they were happy.
The Raven
Once there was a Queen who had a little daughter who was still so
yoimg that she could not walk. One day the child was naughty. The
The Raven 475
mother might say what she liked, but the child would not be quiet.
Then the Queen became impatient, and as the ravens were flying
about the palace, she opened the window and said, "I wish you were a raven and would fly away, and then I should have some
rest." Scarcely had she spoken the words, before the child was changed into a raven, and flew from her arms out of the window. It
flew into a dark forest, and stayed in it a long time, and the parents
heard nothing of their child.
One day a man was on his way through this forest and heard the
raven crying, and followed the voice, and when he came nearer, the
bird said, "I am a King's daughter by birth, and am bewitched, but
thou canst set me free." "What am I to do?" asked he. She said,
"Go further into the forest, and thou wilt find a house, wherein sits an aged woman, who will offer thee meat and drink, but thou must
accept nothing; for if thou eatest or drinkest anything, thou wilt fall
into a sleep, and then thou wilt not be able to dehver me. In the
garden behind the house there is a great heap of tan, and on this
thou shalt stand and wait for me. For three days I will come every
afternoon at two o'clock in a carriage. On the first day four white horses will be harnessed to it, then four chestnut horses, and lastly
four black ones; but if thou art not awake, but sleeping, I shall not
be set free." The man promised to do everything that she desired,
but the raven said, "Alasl I know already that thou wilt not dehver
me; thou wilt accept something from the woman." The man once more promised that he would certainly not touch
anything either to eat or to drink. But when he entered the house
the old woman came to him and said, "Poor man, how faint you
are; come and refresh yourself; eat and drink." "No," said the man,
"1 will not eat or drink." She, however, let him have no peace, and
said, "If you will not eat, take one drink out of the glass; one is
nothing." Then he let himself be persuaded, and drank. Shortly before two o'clock in the afternoon he went into the garden to the tan heap to wait for the raven. As he was standing there, his weariness
aU at once became so great that he could not struggle against it,
and lay down for a short time, but he was determined not to go to
sleep. Hardly, however, had he lain down, than his eyes closed of
their own accord, and he fell asleep and slept so soundly that nothing in the world could have aroused him.
At two o'clock the raven came driving up with four white horses,
but she was aheady in deep grief and said, "I know he is asleep." And when she came into the garden, he was indeed lying there
476 Grimm*s Complete Fairy Tales
asleep on the heap of tan. She alighted from the carriage, went to
him, shook him, and called him, but he did not awake.
Next day about noon, the old woman came again and brought
him food and drink, but he would not take any of it. But she let
him have no rest and persuaded him until at length he again took
one drink out of the glass. Towards two o'clock he went into the garden to the tan heap to wait for the raven, but all at once felt
such a great weariness that his hmbs would no longer support him.
He could not stand upright, and was forced to lie down, and fell
into a heavy sleep. When the raven drove up with four brown
horses, she was aheady full of grief, and said, "I know he is
asleep." She went to him, but there he lay sleeping, and there was no wakening him.
Next day the old woman asked what was the meaning of this? He
was neither eating nor drinking anything; did he want to die? He
replied, "I am not allowed to eat or drink, and will not do so." She, however, set a dish with meat, and a glass with wine before him,
and when he smelt it he could not resist, and swallowed a deep
draught. When the time came, he went out into the garden to the
heap of tan, and waited for the King's daughter; but he became stiU more weary than on the day before, and lay down and slept as
soundly as if he had been a stone.
At two o'clock the raven came with four black horses, and the coachman and everything else was black. She was aheady in the
deepest grief, and said, "1 know that he is asleep and cannot
dehver me." When she came to him, there he was lying fast asleep. She shook him and called him, but she could not waken him. Then
she laid a loaf beside him, and after that a piece of meat, and
thirdly a bottle of wine, and he might consiune as much of aU of
them as he Hked, but they would never grow less. After this she
took a gold ring from her finger, and put it on his, and her name
was graven on it. Lastly, she laid a letter beside him wherein was
written what she had given him, and that none of the things would
ever grow less; and in it was also written, "1 see right weU that thou wilt never be able to deliver me here, but if thou art still
willing to dehver me, come to the golden castle of Stromberg; it lies
in thy power, of that I am certain." And when she had given him all these things, she seated herself in her carriage, and drove to the
golden castle of Stromberg.
When the man awoke and saw that he had slept, he was sad at
heart, and said, "She has certainly driven by, and I have not set her
free." Then he perceived the things which were lying beside him,
The Raven 477
and read the letter wherein was written how everything had happened. So he arose and went away, intending to go to the golden
castle of Stromberg, but he did not know where it was. After he
had walked about the world for a long time, he entered into a dark
forest, and walked for fourteen days without stopping, and still
could not find his way out. Then it was once more evening, and he
was so tired that he lay down in a thicket and fell asleep.
Next day he went onwards, and in the evening, as he was again
about to lie down beneath some bushes, he heard such a howling
and crying that he could not go to sleep. And when the time came
when people light the candles, he saw one gUmmering, and arose
and went towards it. Then he came to a house which seemed very
small, for in front of it a great giant was standing. He thought to
himself, "If I go in, and the giant sees me, it will very likely cost
me my hfe." At length he ventured it and went in. When the giant saw him,
he said, *Tt is well that thou comest, for it is long since I have
eaten; I will at once eat thee for my supper." "I'd rather thou
wouldst leave that alone," said the man, "I do not Hke to be eaten; but if thou hast any desire to eat, I have quite enough here to satisfy thee." "If that be true," said the giant, "thou mayst be easy, I
was only going to devour thee because I had nothing else." Then they went, and sat down to the table, and the man took out the
bread, wine, and meat which would never come to an end. "This
pleases me well," said the giant, and ate to his heart's content. Then
the man said to him, "Canst thou tell me where the golden castle of
Stromberg is?" The giant said, "I will look in my map; all the
towns, and villages, and houses are to be found in it." He brought out the map which he had in the room and looked for the castle,
but it was not to be found in it. 'It's no matterl" said he, "I have some still larger maps in my cupboard upstairs, and we will look in
them." But there, too, it was in vain. The man now wanted to go onwards, but the giant begged him
to wait a few days longer until his brother, who had gone out to
bring some provisions, came home. When the brother came home
they inquired about the golden castle of Stromberg. He replied,
"When I have eaten and have had enough, I will look in the map." Then he went with them up to his chamber, and they searched in
his map, but could not find it. Then he brought out still older maps,
and they never rested until they found the golden castle of Stromberg, but it was many thousand miles away. "How am I to get
there?" asked the man. The giant said, "I have two hours' time.
478 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
during which I will carry thee into the neighborhood, but after that
I must be at home to suckle the child that we have." So the giant carried the man to about a hundred leagues from the
castle, and said, "Thou canst very well walk the rest of the way
alone." And he turned back, but the man went onwards day and night, imtil at length he came to the golden castle of Stromberg. It
stood on a glass-mountain, and the bewitched maiden drove in her
carriage round the castle, and then went inside it. He rejoiced
when he saw her and wanted to cHmb up to her, but when he
began to do so he always slipped down the glass again. And when
he saw that he could not reach her, he was filled with trouble, and
said to himself, "I will stay down here below, and wait for her." So he built himself a hut and stayed in it for a whole year, and
every day saw the King's daughter driving about above, but never could go to her. Then one day he saw from his hut three robbers
who were beating each other, and cried to them, "God be with ye!" They stopped when they heard the cry, but as they saw no one,
they once more began to beat each other, and that too most dangerously. So he again cried, "God be with ye." Again they stopped, looked round about, but as they saw no one they went on beating
each other. Then he cried for the third time, "God be with ye," and
thought, "I must see what these three are about," and went thither and asked why they were beating each other so furiously. One of
them said that he had found a stick, and that when he struck a door
with it, that door would spring open. The next said that he had
found a mantle, and that whenever he put it on, he was invisible, but the third said he had foimd a horse on which a man could ride
everywhere, even up the glass-mountain. And now they did not
know whether they ought to have these things in conmion, or
whether they ought to divide them.
Then the man said, '1 wiU give you something in exchange for these three things. Money indeed have I not, but I have other
things of more value; but first I must try yours to see if you have
told the truth." They put him on the horse, threw the mantle round him, and gave him the stick in his hand, and when he had all these
things they were no longer able to see him. So he gave them some
vigorous blows and cried, "Now, vagabonds, you have got what
you deserve; are you satisfied?" He rode up the glass-mountain; but when he came in front of the
castle at the top, it was shut. Then he struck the door with his stick,
and it sprang open immediately. He went in and ascended the
stairs until he came to the hall where the maiden was sitting with a
The Crystal Ball 479
golden cup full of wine before her. She, however, could not see him
because he had the mantle on. And when he came up to her, he
drew from his finger the ring which she had given him, and threw
it into the cup so that it rang. Then she cried, "That is my ring, so
the man who is to deliver me must be here." They searched the whole castle and did not find him, but he had gone out, and had
seated himself on the horse and thrown o£F the mantle. When they
came to the door, she saw him and cried aloud in her delight. Then
he ahghted and took the King's daughter in his arms, but she kissed
him and said, "Now hast thou set me free, and tomorrow we will
celebrate our wedding."
The Crystal Ball
There was once an enchantress who had three sons who loved each
other as brothers, but the old woman did not trust them, and
thought they wanted to steal her power from her. So she changed
the eldest into an eagle, which was forced to dwell in the rocky
mountains, and was often seen sweeping in great circles in the sky.
The second, she changed into a whale, which lived in the deep sea,
and all that was seen of it was that it sometimes spouted up a great
jet of water in the air. Each of them only bore his human form for
two hours daily. The third son, who was afraid she might change
him into a raging wild beast— a bear perhaps, or a wolf— went secretly away.
He had heard that a King's daughter who was bewitched, was imprisoned in the Castle of the Golden Sun, and was waiting for
deliverance. Those, however, who had tried to free her risked their
lives; three-and-twenty youths had already died a miserable death,
and now only one other might make the attempt, after which no
more must come. And as his heart was without fear, he caught at
the idea of seeking out the Castle of the Golden Sun. He had already traveled about for a long time without being able to find it,
when he came by chance into a great forest, and did not know the
way out of it.
All at once he saw in the distance two giants, who made a sign to
him with their hands, and when he came to them they said, "We are quarrehng about a cap, and which of us it is to belong to, and
480 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
as we are equally strong, neither of us can get tiie better of the
other. The small men are cleverer than we are, so we will leave the
decision to thee." "How can you dispute about an old cap?" said
the youth. "Thou dost not know what properties it has! It is a wishing-cap; whosoever puts it on, can wish himself away wherever
he likes, and in an instant he will be there." "Give me the cap," said
the youth, "I will go a short distance off, and when I call you, you must run a race, and the cap shall belong to the one who gets first
to me." He put it on and went away, and thought of the King's daughter, forgot the giants, and walked continually onward. At
length he sighed from the very bottom of his heart, and cried, "Ah,
if I were but at the Castle of the Golden Sun," and hardly had the words passed his lips than he was standing on a high mountain be- fore the gate of the castle.
He entered and went through all the rooms, until in the last he
found the King's daughter. But how shocked he was when he saw her. She had an ashen-grey face full of wrinkles, blear eyes, and red
hair. "Art thou the King's daughter, whose beauty the whole world
praises?" cried he. "Ah," she answered, "this is not my form; hmnan eyes can only see me in this state of ugliness, but that thou
mayst know what I am like, look in the mirror— it does not let itself
be misled— it will show thee my image as it is in truth." She gave him the mirror in his hand, and he saw therein the likeness of the
most beautiful maiden on earth, and saw, too, how the tears were
rolling down her cheeks with grief.
Then said he, "How canst thou be set free? I fear no danger."
She said, "He who gets the crystal ball, and holds it before the enchanter, will destroy his power with it, and I shall resume my
true shape. Ah," she added, "so many have already gone to meet death for this, and thou art so young; I grieve that thou shouldst
encoimter such great danger." "Nothing can keep me from doing
it," said he, "but tell me what I must do." "Thou shalt know everything," said the King's daughter; "when thou descendest the moun- tain on which the castle stands, a wild bull will stand below by a
spring, and thou must fight with it, and if thou hast the luck to kill
it, a fiery bird will spring out of it, which bears in its body a burn- ing egg, and in the egg the crystal ball lies like a yoDc. The bird will
not, however, let the egg fall until forced to do so, and if it fall on
the ground, it will flame up and bum everything that is near, and
melt even ice itself, and with it the crystal ball, and then all thy
trouble will have been in vain." The youth went down to the spring, where the bull snorted and
The Donkey 481
bellowed at him. After a long struggle he plunged his sword in the
animal's body, and it fell down. Instantly a fiery bird arose from it,
and was about to fly away, but the yoimg man's brother, the eagle, who was passing between the clouds, swooped down, hunted it
away to the sea, and struck it with his beak imtil, in its extremity, it
let the egg fall. The egg did not, however, fall into the sea, but on a
fisherman's hut which stood on the shore and the hut began at once to smoke and was about to break out in flames.
Then arose in the sea waves as high as a house, they streamed
over the hut, and subdued the fire. The other brother, the whale,
had come swimming to them, and had driven the water up on high.
When the fire was extinguished, the youth sought for the egg and
happily found it; it was not yet melted, but the shell was broken by
being so suddenly cooled with the water, and he could take out the
crystal ball unhurt.
When the youth went to the enchanter and held it before him,
the latter said, "My power is destroyed, and from this time forth thou art the King of the Castle of the Golden Sun. With this canst
thou likewise give back to thy brothers their human form," Then
the youth hastened to the King's daughter, and when he entered the room, she was standing there in the fuU splendor of her beauty,
and joyfully they exchanged rings with each other.
The Donkey
Once ui>on a time there lived a King and a Queen, who were rich, and had everything they wanted except one thing: they had no
children. The Queen lamented over this day and night, and said, "I
am like a field on which nothing grows." At last God gave her her wish, but when the child came into the world, it did not look like a
human child, but was a httle donkey. When the mother saw that,
her lamentations and outcries began in real earnest; she said she
would far rather have had no child at all than have a donkey, and
that they were to throw it into the water that the fishes might devour it. But the King said, *No, since God has sent him he shall be my son and heir, and after my death sit on the royal throne, and
wear the kingly crown." The donkey, therefore, was brought up and grew bigger, and his
482 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
ears grew up beautifully high and straight. He was, however, of a
merry disposition, jumped about, played and had especial pleasure
in music, so that he went to a celebrated musician and said, "Teach
me thine art, that I may play the lute as well as thou dost." "Ah,
dear little master," answered the musician, "that would come very hard to you, your fingers are certainly not suited to it, and are far
too big. I am afraid the strings would not last." No excuses were of any use. The donkey was determined to play
the lute; he was persevering and industrious, and at last learnt to
do it as well as the master himself. The young lordHng once went
out walking full of thought and came to a well; he looked into it
and in the mirror-clear water saw his donkey's form. He was so distressed about it, that he went out into the wide world and only
took with him one faithful companion. They traveled up and down,
and at last they came into a kingdom where an old King reigned
who had an only but wonderfully beautiful daughter. The donkey
said, "Here we will stay," knocked at the gate, and cried, "A guest
is without— open, that he may enter." As, however, the gate was not opened, he sat down, took his lute and played it in the most delightful manner with his two fore-feet. Then the door-keeper
opened his eyes most wonderfully wide, and ran to the King and
said, "Outside by the gate sits a young donkey which plays the lute
as well as an experienced masterl" "Then let the musician come to
me," said the King. When, however, a donkey came in, every one began to laugh at
the lute-player. And now the donkey was to sit down and eat with
the servants. He, however, was unwilMng, and said, "I am no common stable-ass, I am a noble one." Then they said, 'Tf that is what
thou art, seat thyself with the men of war." "No," said he, "1 will sit
by the King." The King smiled, and said good-humoredly, "Yes, it
shall be as thou wilt, little ass, come here to me." Then he asked,
"Little ass, how does my daughter please thee?" The donkey turned
his head towards her, looked at her, nodded and said, "I like her above measure, I have never yet seen any one so beautiful as she
is." "Well, then, thou shalt sit next her too," said the King. "That is
exactly what I wish," said the donkey, and he placed himself by her side, ate and drank, and knew how to behave himself daintily and
cleanly.
When the noble beast had stayed a long time at the King's court,
he thought, "What good does all this do me, I shall still have to go
home again," let his head hang sadly, and went to the King and asked for his dismissal. But the King had grown fond of him, and
The Donkey 483
said, 'Xittle ass, what ails thee? Thou lookest as sour as a jug of
vinegar; I will give thee what thou wantest. Dost thou want gold?"
'T^o," said the donkey, and shook his head. "Dost thou want jewels
and rich dress?" "No." "Dost thou wish for half my kingdom?" "Indeed, no." Then said the King, "If I did but know what would
make thee content. Wilt thou have my pretty daughter to wife?"
"Ah, yes," said the ass, "I should indeed like her," and all at once he became quite merry and full of happiness, for that was exactly
what he was wishing for.
So a great and splendid wedding was held. In the evening, when
the bride and bridegroom were led into their bed-room, the King
wanted to know if the ass would behave well, and ordered a servant to hide himself there. When they were both within, the bridegroom bolted the door, looked aroimd, and as he believed that they
were quite alone, he suddenly threw off his ass's skin, and stood
there in the form of a handsome royal youth. "Now," said he, "thou
seest who I am, and seest also that I am not unworthy of thee." Then the bride was glad, and kissed him, and loved him dearly.
When morning came, he jumped up, put his animal's skin on again, and no one could have guessed what kind of a form was hidden beneath it. Soon came the old King, "Ah," cried he, "is the little ass merry? But surely thou art sad," said he to his daughter,
"that thou hast not got a proper man for thy husband?" "Oh, no, dear father, I love him as well as if he were the handsomest in the
world, and I wiU keep him as long as I hve." The King was sur- prised, but the servant who had concealed himself came and revealed everything to him. The King said, "That cannot be true."
"Then watch yourself the next night, and you will see it with your own eyes; and hark you, lord King, if you were to take his skin
away and throw it in the fire, he would be forced to show himself
in his true shape." "Thy advice is good," said the King, and at night when they were asleep, he stole in, and when he got to the bed he
saw by the light of the moon a noble-looking youth lying there, and the sldn lay stretched on the ground.
So he took it away, and had a great fire lighted outside, and
threw the skin into it, and remained by it himself until it was all
burnt to ashes. As, however, he was anxious to know how the
robbed man would behave himself, he stayed awake the whole
night and watched. When the youth had slept his sleep out, he got
up by the first light of morning, and wanted to put on the ass's sldn, but it was not to be found. On this he was alarmed, and, full of grief
and anxiety, said, "Now I shall have to contrive to escape." But
484 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
when he went out, there stood the King, who said, "My son, whither away in such haste? what hast thou in thy mind? Stay here,
thou art such a handsome man, thou shalt not go away from me. I
will now give thee half my kingdom, and after my death thou shalt
have the whole of it." "Then I hope that what begins so well may
end well, and I will stay v^dth you," said the youth.
And the old man gave him half the kingdom, and in a year's time, when he died, the youth had the whole, and after the death
of his father he had another kingdom as well, and lived in all
magnificence.
Hans the Hedgehog
There once was a countryman who had money and land in plenty,
but no matter how rich he was, one thing was still wanting to complete his happiness— he had no children. Often when he went into
the town with the other peasants they mocked him and asked why
he had no children. At last he became angry, and when he got
home he said, "I will have a child, even if it be a hedgehog." Then his wife had a child, that was a hedgehog in the upper part of his
body, and a boy in the lower, and when she saw the child, she was
terrified, and said, "See, there thou hast brought ill-luck on us."
Then said the man, "What can be done now? The boy must be
christened, but we shall not be able to get a godfather for him."
The woman said, "And we cannot call him anything else but Hans
the Hedgehog."
When he was christened, the parson said, "He cannot go into any
ordinary bed because of his spikes." So a Httle straw was put be- hind the stove, and Hans the Hedgehog was laid on it. His mother
could not suckle him, for he would have pricked her with his quills.
So he lay there behind the stove for eight years, and his father was
tired of him and thought, "If he would but die!" He did not die, however, but remained lying there.
Now it happened that there was a fair in the town, and the peasant was about to go to it, and asked his wife what he should bring
back v^th him for her. "A little meat and a couple of white rolls
which are wanted for the house," said she. Then he asked the ser- vant, and she wanted a pair of slippers and some stockings with
Hans the Hedgehog 485
clocks. At last he said also, "And what wilt thou have, Hans my
Hedgehog?" "Dear father," he said, "do bring me bagpipes." When, therefore, the father came home again, he gave his wife
what he had bought for her— meat and white rolls, and then he
gave the maid the slippers, and the stockings with clocks; and
lastly, he went behind the stove, and gave Hans the Hedgehog the
bagpipes. And when Hans the Hedgehog had the bagpipes, he said,
"Dear father, do go to the forge and get the cock shod, and then I
will ride away, and never come back again." On this, the father was delighted to think that he was going to get rid of him, and had the
cock shod for him, and when it was done, Hans the Hedgehog got
on it, and rode away, but took swine and asses with him which he
intended to keep in the forest.
When they got there he made the cock fly on to a high tree with
him, and there he sat for many a long year, and watched his asses
and swine until the herd was quite large, and his father knew nothing about him. While he was sitting in the tree, however, he played
his bagpipes, and made music which was very beautiful. Once a
King came traveling by who had lost his way and heard the music.
He was astonished at it, and sent his servant forth to look all round
and see from whence this music came. He spied about, but saw
nothing but a little animal sitting up aloft on the tree, which looked
like a cock with a hedgehog on it which made this music. Then the
King told the servant he was to ask why he sat there, and if he
knew the road which led to his kingdom.
So Hans the Hedgehog descended from the tree, and said he
would show the way if the King would write a bond and promise
him whatever he first met in the royal courtyard as soon as he arrived at home. Then the King thought, "I can easily do that, Hans
the Hedgehog understands nothing, and I can write what I like." So the King took pen and ink and wrote something, and when he had
done it, Hans the Hedgehog showed him the way, and he got safely
home. But his daughter, when she saw him from afar, was so overjoyed that she ran to meet him, and kissed him. Then he remembered Hans the Hedgehog, and told her what had happened, and
that he had been forced to promise whatsoever first met him when
he got home, to a verv strange animal which sat on a cock as if it
were a horse, and made beautiful music, but that instead of writing
that he should have what he wanted, he had written that he should
not have it. Thereupon the Princess was glad, and said he had done
well, for she never would have gone away with the Hedgehog.
Hans the Hedgehog, however, looked after his asses and pigs.
486 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
and was always merry and sat on the tree and played his bagpipes.
Now it came to pass that another King came journeying by with
his attendants and runners, and he also had lost his way, and did
not know how to get home again because the forest was so large.
He likewise heard the beautiful music from a distance, and asked
his rimner what that could be, and told him to go and see. Then the
runner went under the tree, and saw the cock sitting at the top of
it, and Hans the Hedgehog on the cock. The runner asked him
what he was about up there. "1 am keeping my asses and my pigs;
but what is your desire?" The messenger said that they had lost their way, and could not get back into their own kingdom, and
asked if he would not show them the way. Then Hans the Hedgehog got down the tree with the cock, and told the aged King that
he would show him the way, if he would give him for his own
whatsoever first met him in front of his royal palace. The King said,
'Tfes," and wrote a promise to Hans the Hedgehog that he should have this. That done, Hans rode on before him on the cock, and
pointed out the way, and the King reached his kingdom again in
safety.
When he got to the courtyard, there were great rejoicings. The
King had an only daughter who was very beautiful; she ran to meet
him, threw her arms round his neck, and was deHghted to have her
old father back again. She asked him where in the world he had
been so long. So he told her how he had lost his way, and had very
nearly not come back at all, but that as he was traveling through a
great forest, a creature, half hedgehog, half man, who was sitting
astride a cock in a high tree, and making music, had shown him the
way and helped him to get out; but that in return he had promised
him whatsoever first met him in the royal coiutyard, and how that
was she herself, which made him unhappy now. But on this she
promised that, for love of her father, she would wilKngly go with this Hans if he came.
Hans the Hedgehog, however, took care of his pigs, and the pigs
multiplied until they became so many in number that the whole
forest was filled with them. Then Hans the Hedgehog resolved not
to five in the forest any longer, and sent word to his father to have
every sty in the village emptied, for he was coming with such a
great herd that aU might kill who wished to do so. When his father
heard that he was troubled, for he thought Hans the Hedgehog had
died long ago. Hans the Hedgehog, however, seated himself on the
cock, and drove the pigs before him into the village, and ordered
the slaughter to begin. Hal— but there was a killing and a chopping
Hans the Hedgehog 487
that might have been heard two miles off! After this Hans the
Hedgehog said, "Father, let me have the cock shod once more at the forge, and then I will ride away and never come back as long as
I hve." Then the father had the cock shod once more, and was pleased that Hans the Hedgehog would never return again.
Hans the Hedgehog rode away to the first kingdom. There the
King had commanded that whosoever came moimted on a cock and
had bagpipes with him should be shot at, cut down, or stabbed by
every one, so that he might not enter the palace. When, therefore,
Hans the Hedgehog came riding thither, they all pressed forward
against him with their pikes, but he spurred the cock and it flew up
over the gate in front of the King's window and lighted there, and Hans cried that the King must give him what he had promised, or
he would take both his life and his daughters.
Then the King began to speak softly to his daughter and beg her
to go away with Hans in order to save her own life and her father s.
So she dressed herself in white, and her father gave her a carriage
with six horses and magnificent attendants together with gold and
possessions. She seated herself in the carriage, and placed Hans the
Hedgehog beside her with the cock and the bagpipes, and then they
took leave and drove away, and the King thought he should never
see her again. He was, however, deceived in his expectation, for
when they were at a short distance from the town, Hans the Hedgehog took her pretty clothes off, and pierced her with his hedgehog's
sldn until she bled all over. 'That is the reward of your falseness,"
said he, "go your way, I will not have youl" and on that he chased her home again, and she was disgraced for the rest of her life.
Hans the Hedgehog, however, rode on further on the cock, with
his bagpipes, to the dominions of the second King to whom he had
shown the way. This one, however, had arranged that if any one
resembling Hans the Hedgehog should come, they were to present
arms, give him safe conduct, cry long life to him, and lead him to
the royal palace.
But when the King's daughter saw him she was terrified, for he looked quite too strange. She remembered, however, that she could
not change her mind, for she had given her promise to her father.
So Hans the Hedgehog was welcomed by her, and married to her,
and had to go with her to the royal table, and she seated herself by
his side, and they ate and drank. When the evening came and they
wanted to go to sleep, she was afraid of his quills, but he told her
she was not to fear, for no harm would befall her, and he told the
old King that he was to appoint four men to watch by the door of
488 Grimms Complete Fairy Tales
the chamber, and Mght a great fire, and when he entered the room
and was about to get into bed, he would creep out of his hedgehog's skin and leave it lying there by the bed-side, and that the men were to run nimbly to it, throw it in the fire, and stay by it until it was consumed.
When the clock struck eleven, he went into the chamber,
stripped oflE the hedgehog's skin, and left it lying by the bed. Then came the men and fetched it swoftly, and threw it in the fire; and
when the fire had consumed it, he was deHvered, and lay there in
bed in hiunan form, but he was coal-black as if he had been burnt.
The King sent for his physician who washed him with precious
salves, and anointed him, and he became white, and was a handsome young man. When the King's daughter saw that she was glad, and the next morning they arose joyfully, ate and drank, and then
the marriage was properly solemnized, and Hans the Hedgehog re- ceived the kingdom from the aged King.
When several years had passed he went v^dth his wiie to his father, and said that he was his son. The father, however, declared he
had no son— he had never had but one, and he had been born Hke a
hedgehog with, spikes, and had gone forth into the world. Then
Hans made himself known, and the old father rejoiced and went
with him to his kingdom.
The King of the Golden Mountain
A CERTAIN MERCHANT had two children, a boy and a girl; they were
both yoimg, too young to walk. And two richly-laden ships of his sailed forth to sea with all his property on board, and just as he was
expecting to vidn much money by them, news came that they had
gone to the bottom, and now instead of being a rich man he was a
poor one, and had nothing left but one field outside the town.
In order to drive his misfortune a httle out of his thoughts, he
went out to this field, and as he was walking backwards and forwards in it, a little black mannildn stood suddenly by his side, and
asked why he was so sad, and what he was taking so much to heart.
Then said the merchant, "If thou couldst help me I would willingly tell thee." "Who knows?" replied the black dwarf. "Perhaps I
can help thee." Then the merchant told him that all he possessed
The King of the Golden Mountain 489
had gone to the bottom of the sea, and that he had nothing left but
this field. "Do not trouble thyself," said the dwarf. "If thou wilt promise to give me the first thing that rubs itself against thy leg
when thou art at home again, and to bring it here to this place in
twelve years' time, thou shalt have as much money as thou wilt."
The merchant thought, "What can that be but my dog?" and did not remember his little boy, so he said yes, gave the black man a
written and sealed promise, and went home.
When he reached home, his fittle boy was so delighted that he
held by a bench, tottered up to him and seized him fast by the legs.
The father was shocked, for he remembered his promise, and now
knew what he had pledged himself to do; as, however, he still
found no money in his chest, he thought the dwarf had only been
jesting. A month afterwards he went up to the garret, intending to
gather together some old tin and to sell it, and saw a great heap of
money lying. Then he was happy again, made pm-chases, became a
greater merchant than before, and felt that this world was well gov- erned.
In the meantime the boy grew tall, and at the same time sharp
and clever. But the nearer the twelfth year approached the more
anxious grew the merchant, so that his distress might be seen in his
face. One day his son asked what ailed him, but the father would
not say. The boy, however, persisted so long, that at last he told
him that without being aware of what he was doing, he had promised him to a black dwarf, and had received much money for doing
so. He said likewise that he had set his hand and seal to this, and
that now when twelve years had gone by he would have to give
him up.
Then said the son, "Oh, father, do not be uneasy, all will go well.
The black man has no power over me." The son had himself blessed by the priest, and when the time came, father and son went together to the field, and the son made a circle and placed himself in- side it with his father. Then came the black dwarf and said to the
old man, "Hast thou brought with thee that which thou hast promised me?" He was silent, but the son asked, "What dost thou want
here?" Then said the black dwarf, *T have to speak with thy father,
and not with thee." The son replied, "Thou hast betrayed and
misled my father; give back the writing." "No," said the black
dwarf, "I will not give up my rights." They spoke tosether for a lone time after this, but at last they
agreed that the son, as he did not belong to the enemy of mankind,
nor yet to his father, should seat himself in a smaU boat, which
490 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
should lie on water which was flowing away from them, and that
the father should push it o£E with his own foot, and then the son
should remain given up to the water. So he took leave of his father,
placed himself in a little boat, and the father had to push it off with
his own foot. The boat capsized so that the keel was uppermost,
and the father beheved his son was lost, and went home and mourned for him.
The boat, however, did not sink, but floated quietly away, and
the boy sat safely inside it, and it floated thus for a long time, until
at last it stopped by an unknown shore. .Then he landed and saw a
beautiful castle before him, and set out to go to it.
When he entered it, however, he found that it was bewitched.
He went through every room, but all were empty imtil he reached
the last, where a snake lay coiled in a ring. The snake, however,
was an enchanted maiden, who rejoiced to see him, and said, "Hast thou come, oh, my deliverer? I have already waited twelve years
for thee; this kingdom is bewitched, and thou must set it free."
"How can I do that?" he inquired. "Tonight come twelve black men, covered with chains, who will ask what thou art doing here;
keep silence, however; give them no answer, and let them do what
they wiU with thee; they will torment thee, beat thee, stab thee; let
everything pass, only do not speak; at twelve o'clock, they must go away again.
"On the second night twelve others will come; on the third, foin:-
and-twenty, who will cut off thy head, but at twelve o'clock their power will be over, and then if thou hast endured aU, and hast not
spoken the sHghtest word, I shall be released. I will come to thee,
and will have, in a bottle, some of the water of Hfe. I will rub thee
with that, and then thou wilt come to life again, and be as healthy
as before." Then said he, "I will gladly set thee free." Everything happened just as she had said. The black men could
not force a single word from him, and on the third night the snake
became a beautiful princess who came with the water of life and
brought him back to Me again. So she threw herseff into his arms
and kissed him, and there was joy and gladness in the whole castle.
After this their marriage was celebrated, and he was King of the Golden Moimtain.
They lived very happily together, and the Queen bore a fine boy.
Eight years had already gone by, when the King bethought him of
his father; his heart was moved, and he wished to visit him. The
Queen, however, would not let him go away, and said, 'T know beforehand that it will cause my unhappiness"; but he suffered her to
The King of the Golden Mountain 491
have no rest until she consented. At their parting she gave him a
wishing-ring, and said, "Take this ring and put it on thy finger, and then thou wilt immediately be transported whithersoever thou
wouldst be, only thou must promise me not to use it in wishing me
away from this place and with thy father." That he promised her, put the ring on his finger, and wished himself at home, just outside the town where his father lived.
Instantly he found himself there, and made for the town, but
when he came to the gate, the sentries would not let him go in, because he wore such strange and yet such rich and magnificent
clothing. Then he went to a hill where a shepherd was watching his
sheep, changed clothes with him, put on his old shepherd's-coat, and then entered the town without hindrance. When he came to his
father, he made himself known to him, but he did not at all beHeve
that the shepherd was his son, and said he certainly had had a son,
but that he was dead long ago; however, as he saw he was a poor,
needy shepherd, he would give him something to eat.
Then the shepherd said to his parents, "I am verily your son. Do you know of no mark on my body by which you could recognize
me?" "Yes," said his mother, "our son had a raspberry mark under
his right arm." He shpped back his shirt, and they saw the rasp- berry under his right arm, and no longer doubted that he was their
son. Then he told them that he was King of the Golden Mountain,
and a Ring's daughter was his wife, and that they had a fine son of
seven years old. Then said the father, "That is certainly not true; it
is a fine kind of King who goes about in a ragged shepherd's-coat." At these words the son flew into a passion, and without thinking of
his promise, turned his ring round, and wished both his wife and
child with him. They were there in a second, but the Queen wept,
and reproached him, and said that he had broken his word, and
had brought misfortune upon her. He said, "I have done it thoughtlessly, and not with evil intention," and tried to calm her, and she pretended to believe this; but she had mischief in her mind.
Then he led her out of the town into the field, and showed her
the stream where the little boat had been pushed off, and then he
said, 'T am tired; sit down, I will sleep awhile on thy lap." And he laid his head on her lap, and fell asleep. When he was asleep, she
first drew the ring from his finger, then she drew away the foot
which was under him, leaving only the slipper behind her, and she
took her child in her arms, and wished herself back in her own
kingdom.
When he awoke, there he lay quite deserted, and his wife and
492 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
child were gone, and so was the ring from his finger; the slipper
only was still there as a token. "Home to thy parents thou canst not
return," thought he, "they would say that thou wast a wizard; thou
must be off, and walk on until thou arrivest in thine own kingdom." So he went away and came at length to a hill by which three giants
were standing, disputing with each other because they did not
know how to divide their father's property. When they saw him passing by, they called to him and said Httle men had quick wits, and that he was to divide their inheritance for them.
The inheritance, however, consisted of a sword, which had this
property that if any one took it in his hand, and said, "All heads off
but mine," every head would lie on the ground; secondly, of a cloak which made any one who put it on invisible; thirdly, of a pair of
boots which could transport the wearer to any place he wished in a
moment. He said, "Give me the three things that I may see if they
are still in good condition." They gave him the cloak, and when he had put it on, he was invisible and changed into a fly. Then he resumed his ovm form and said, "The cloak is a good one, now give
me the sword." They said, "No, we will not give thee that; if thou
wert to say, 'All heads off but mine,' all our heads would be off, and
thou alone wouldst be left with thine." Nevertheless they gave it to him with the condition that he was only to try it against a tree. This
he did, and the sword cut in two the trunk of a tree as if it had
been a blade of straw. Then he wanted to have the boots likev^se,
but they said, "No, we will not give them; if thou hadst them on thy feet and wert to wish thyself at the top of the hill, we should be
left dovm here with nothing." "Oh, no," said he, "I wdll not do
that." So they gave him the boots as well. And now when he had got all these things, he thought of nothing
but his -wiie and his child, and said just as it were to himself, "Oh,
if I were but on the Golden Mountain," and at the same moment he vanished from the sight of the giants, and thus their inheritance was divided.
When he was near his palace, he heard sounds of joy, and fiddles,
and flutes, and the people told him that his wife was celebrating
her wedding wdth another. He fell into a rage, and said, "False
woman, she betrayed and deserted me while I was asleep!" So he put on his cloak, and unseen by all went into the palace. When he
entered the dining-hall a great table was spread wdth delicious
food, and the guests were eating and drinking, and laughing and
jesting. She sat on a royal seat in the midst of them in splendid ap- parel, wdth a crown on her head. He placed himself behind her, and
The Golden Bird 493
no one saw him. When she put a piece of meat on a plate for herself, he took it away and ate it, and when she poured out a glass of
wine for herself, he took it away and drank it. She was always helping herself to something, and yet she never got anything, for plate
and glass disappeared immediately. Then dismayed and ashamed,
she arose and went to her chamber and wept, but he followed her
there. She said, "Has the devil power over me, or did my deliverer
never come?" Then he struck her in the face, and said, "Did thy deliverer never come? It is he who has thee in his power, thou
traitress. Have I deserved this from thee?" Then he made himself
visible, went into the hall, and cried, "The wedding is at an end,
the true King has returned." The Kings, Princes and coundllors who were assembled there,
ridiculed and mocked him, but he did not trouble to answer them,
and said, "Will you go away, or not?" On this they tried to seize
him and pressed upon him, but he drew his sword and said, "All
heads oflF but mine," and all the heads rolled on the ground. And he alone was master, once more King of the Golden Mountain.
The Golden Bird
In times gone by there was a King who had at the back of his castle a beautiful pleasure-garden, in which stood a tree that bore
golden apples. As the apples ripened they were counted, but one
morning one was missing. Then the King was angry, and he ordered that watch should be kept about the tree every night. Now
the King had three sons, and he sent the eldest to spend the whole
night in the garden: so he watched till midnight, and then he could
keep off sleep no longer, and in the morning another apple was
missing. The second son had to watch the following night; but it
fared no better, for when twelve o'clock had struck he went to sleep, and in the morning another apple was missing. Now came
the tmn of the third son to watch, and he was ready to do so; but
the King had less trust in him, and believed he would acquit him- self still worse than his brothers, but in the end he consented to let
him try. So the young man lay down vmder the tree to watch, and
resolved that sleep should not be master. When it struck twelve
something came rushing through the air, and he saw in the moon-
494 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
light a bird flying towards him, whose feathers glittered like gold.
The bird perched upon the tree, and had already pecked off an
apple, when the young man let fly an arrow at it. The bird flew
away, but the arrow had struck its target, and one of its golden
feathers fell to the ground. The young man picked it up, and taking it next morning to the King, told him what had happened in the
night.
The King called his council together, and all declared that such
a feather was worth more than the whole kingdom. "Since the
feather is so valuable," said the King, "one is not enough for me; I must and will have the whole bird." So the eldest son set off, and relying on his own cleverness he
thought he should soon find the golden bird. When he had gone
some distance he saw a fox sitting at the edge of a wood, and he
pointed his gun at him.
The fox cried out, "Do not shoot me, and I will give you good counsel. You are on your way to find the golden bird, and this evening you will come to a village, in which two taverns stand facing
each other. One will be brightly lighted up, and there will be
plenty of merriment going on inside; do not mind about that, but
go into the other one, although it will look to you very uninviting."
"How can a silly beast give one any rational advice?" thought the
King's son, and let fly at the fox, but missed him, and he stretched out his tail and ran quickly into the wood. Then the young man
went on his way, and towards evening he came to the village, and
there stood the two taverns; in one singing and dancing was going
on, the other looked quite dull and wretched. "I should be a fool,"
said he, "to go into that dismal place, while there is anything so
good close by." So he went into the merry inn, and there lived in clover, quite forgetting the bird and his father, and all good counsel.
As time went on, and the eldest son never came home, the second
son set out to seek the golden bird. He met with the fox, just as the
eldest did, and received good advice from him without attending to
it. And when he came to the ^"^ taverns, his broJ^lier was cfon^^ng and calling to him at the window of one of them, out of which
came sounds of merriment; so he could not resist, but went in and
reveled to his heart's content. And then, as time went on, the youngest son wished to go forth,
and to try his luck, but his father would not consent. 'Tt would be
useless," said he; "he i<; much less likely to find the bird th^n bis brothers, and if any misfortune were to happen to him he would
not know how to help himself; his wits are none of the best."
The Golden Bird 495
But at last, as there was no peace to be had, he let him go. By
the side of the wood sat the fox, begged him to spare his life, and
gave him good counsel. The young man was Idnd, and said, "Be
easy, little fox, I will do you no harm."
"You shall not repent of it," answered the fox, "and that you may
get there all the sooner, get up and sit on my tail." And no sooner had he done so than the fox began to run, and oflF
they went over stock and stone, so that the wind whistled in their
hair. When they reached the village the young man got down, and,
following the fox's advice, went into the mean-looldng tavern, with- out hesitating, and there he passed a quiet night.
The next morning, when he went out into the field, the fox, who
was sitting there already, said, "I will tell you further what you have to do. Go straight on until you come to a castle, before which
a great band of soldiers lie, but do not trouble yourself about them,
for they will be all asleep and snoring; pass through them and forward into the castle, and go through all the rooms, until you come
to one where there is a golden bird hanging in a wooden cage.
Near at hand will stand, empty, a golden cage of state, but you
must beware of taking the bird out of his ugly cage and putting
him into the fine one; if you do so you will come to harm." After he had finished saying this the fox stretched out his tail
again, and the King's son sat him down upon it; then away they went over stock and stone, so that the wind whistled through their
hair. And when the King's son reached the castle he found every- thing as the fox had said, and he at last entered the room where the
golden bird was hanging in a wooden cage, while a golden one was
standing by; the three golden apples too were in the room. Then,
thinking it foolish to let the beautiful bird stay in that mean and
ugly cage, he opened the door of it, took hold of it, and put it in the
golden one. In the same moment the bird uttered a piercing cry.
The soldiers awaked, rushed in, seized the King's son and put him in prison. The next morning he was brought before a judge, and, as
he confessed everything, condemned to death. But the King said he
would spare his Hfe on one condition, that he should bring him the
golden horse whose paces were swifter than the wind, and that
then he should also receive the golden bird as a reward.
So the King's son set off to find the golden horse, but he sighed, and was very sad, for how should it be accomplished? And then he
saw his old friend the fox sitting by the roadside.
"Now, you see," said the fox, "aU this has happened because you would not listen to me. But be of good courage, I wiU bring you
496 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
through, and will tell you how you are to get the golden horse. You
must go straight on until you come to a castle, where the horse
stands in his stable; before the stable-door the grooms will be lying,
but they will all be asleep and snoring; and you can go and quietly
lead out the horse. But one thing you must mind— take care to put
upon him the plain saddle of wood and leather, and not the golden
one, which will hang close by; otherwise it will go badly with you."
Then the fox stretched out his tail, and the King's son seated him- self upon it, and away they went over stock and stone until the
wind whistled through their hair. And everything happened just as
the fox had said, and he came to the stall where the golden horse
was, and as he was about to put on him the plain saddle, he thought
to himself, "Such a beautiful animal would be disgraced were I not
to put on him the good saddle, which becomes him so well." However, no sooner did the horse feel the golden saddle touch
him than he began to neigh. And the grooms all awoke, seized the
King's son and threw him into prison. The next morning he was delivered up to justice and condemned to death, but the King
promised him his life, and also to bestow upon him the golden
horse, if he could convey thither the beautiful Princess of the
golden castle.
With a heavy heart the King's son set out, but by great good luck he soon met with the faithful fox.
1 ought now to leave you to your own ill-luck," said the fox,
"but I am sorry for you, and will once more help you in your need. Your way hes straight up to the golden castle. You will arrive there
in the evening, and at night when all is quiet, the beautiful Princess
goes to the bath. And as she is entering the bathing-house, go up to
her and give her a kiss, then she will follow you, and you can lead
her away; but do not suffer her first to go and take leave of her parents, or it will go ill with you."
Then the fox stretched out his tail, the King's son seated himself upon it, and away they went over stock and stone, so that the wind
whistled through their hair. And when he came to the golden castle
all was as the fox had said. He waited until midnight, when all lay
in deep sleep, and then as the beautiful Princess went to the bathing-house he went up to her and gave her a Idss, and she willingly promised to go with him, but she begged him earnestly, and
with tears, that he would let her first go and take leave of her par- ents. At first he denied her prayer, but as she wept so much the
more, and fell at his feet, he gave in at last. And no sooner had the
Princess reached her father's bedside than he, and all who were in
The Golden Bird 497
the castle, waked up, and the young man was seized and thrown
into prison.
The next morning the King said to him, "Thy Hfe is forfeit, but thou shalt find grace if thou canst level that mountain that lies before my windows, and over which I am not able to see; and if this
is done within eight days thou shalt have my daughter for a reward." So the King's son set to work, and dug and shoveled away with- out ceasing, but when, on the seventh day, he saw how little he had
accomplished, and that all his work was as nothing, he fell into
great sadness, and gave up aU hope. But on the evening of the seventh day the fox appeared, and said, "You do not deserve that I should help you, but go now and lie down to sleep, and I will do
the work for you." The next morning when he awoke, and looked out of the window, the mountain had disappeared. The young man hastened full
of joy to the King, and told him that his behest was fulfilled, and,
whether the King Hked it or not, he had to keep to his word, and let
his daughter go.
So they both went away together, and it was not long before the
faithful fox came up to them.
"WeU., you have got the best first," said he; 'iDut you must know
the golden horse belongs to the Princess of the golden castle."
"But how shall I get it?" asked the young man.
*T am going to teU you," answered the fox. "First, go to the King who sent you to the golden castle, and take to him the beautiful
Princess. There wiU. then be very great rejoicing; he will wdUingly
give you the golden horse, and they v^dU lead him out to you; then
mount him without delay, and stretch out yoiu: hand to each of
them to take leave, and last of all to the Princess, and when you
have her by the hand swing her up on the horse behind you, and
off you go! nobody will be able to overtake you, for that horse goes
swifter than the wind."
And so it was all happily done, and the King's son carried off the beautiful Princess on the golden horse. The fox did not stay behind,
and he said to the young man, "Now, I will help you to get the golden bird. When you draw near the castle where the bird is, let
the lady ahght, and I wiU take her under my care; then you must
ride the golden horse into the castle-yard, and there will be great
rejoicing to see it, and they will bring out to you the golden bird.
As soon as you have the cage in your hand, you must start off back
to us, and then you shall carry the lady away."
498 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
The plan was successfully carried out; and when the yoxmg man
returned with the treasure, the fox said, "Now, what will you give
me for my reward?"
'What would you like?" asked the young man.
*When we are passing through the wood, I desire that you
should slay me, and cut my head and feet oJff."
"That were a strange sign of gratitude," said the King's son, "and
I could not possibly do such a thing."
Then said the fox, "If you will not do it, I must leave you; but before I go let me give you some good advice. Beware of two
things: buy no gallows-meat, and sit at no brook-side." With that the fox ran off into the wood.
The young man thought to himself, "That is a wonderful animal, with most singular ideas. How should any one buy gallows-meat?
and I am sure I have no particular fancy for sitting by a brookside." So he rode on with the beautiful Princess, and their way led
them through the village where his two brothers had stayed. There
they heard great outcry and noise, and when he asked what it was
all about, they told him that two people were going to be hanged.
And when he drew near he saw that it was his two brothers, who
had done aU sorts of evil tricks, and had wasted all their goods. He
asked if there were no means of setting them free.
"Oh yesl if you will buy them off," answered the people; "but why should you spend your money in redeeming such worthless
men?" But he persisted in doing so; and when they were let go they all
went on their journey together.
After a while they came to the wood where the fox had met them
first, and there it seemed so cool and sheltered from the sun's burning rays that the two brothers said, "Let us rest here for a little by
the brook, and eat and drink to refresh ourselves."
The young man consented, quite forgetting the fox's warning, and he seated himself by the brook-side, suspecting no evil. But the
two brothers thrust him backwards into the brook, seized the Princess, the horse, and the bird, and went home to their father.
"Is not this the golden bird that we bring?" said they; "and we
have also the golden horse, and the Princess of the golden castle.* Then there was great rejoicing in the royal castle, but the horse
did not feed, the bird did not chirp, and the Princess sat still and
wept.
The youngest brother, however, had not perished. The brook
The Golden Bird 499
was, by good fortune, dry, and he fell on soft moss without receiving any hurt, but he could not get up again. But in his need the
faithful fox was not lacking; he came up running, and reproached
him for having forgotten his advice.
"But I cannot forsake you all the same," said he; "1 will help you
back again into daylight." So he told the yoimg man to grasp his tail, and hold on to it fast, and so he drew him up again.
"Still you are not quite out of all danger," said the fox; "your brothers, not being certain of your death, have surrounded the
wood with sentinels, who are to put you to death if you let yourself
be seen." A poor beggar-man was sitting by the path, and the young man
changed clothes with him, and went in that disguise into the King's courtyard. Nobody knew him, but the bird began to chirp, and the
horse began to feed, and the beautiful Princess ceased weeping.
"What does this mean?" said the King, astonished.
The Princess answered, "I cannot tell, except that I was sad, and
now I am joyful; it is to me as if my rightful bridegroom had returned," Then she told him all that happened, although the two brothers
had threatened to put her to death if she let out anything. The King
then ordered every person who was in the castle to be brought be- fore him, and with the rest came the yoimg man like a beggar in his
wretched garments; but the Princess knew him, and greeted him
well, falling on his neck and kissing him. The wicked brothers were
seized and put to death, and the youngest brother was married to
the Princess, and succeeded to the inheritance of his father.
But what became of the poor fox? Long afterwards the King's son was going through the wood, and the fox met him and said,
"Now, you have everything that you can wish for, but my misfor- tunes never come to an end, and it lies in your power to free me
from them." And once more he prayed the King's son earnestly to slay him, and cut off his head and feet. So, at last, he consented,
and no sooner was it done than the fox was changed into a man,
and was no other than the brother of the beautiful Princess; and
thus he was set free from a spell that had boimd him for a long,
long time.
And now, indeed, there lacked nothing to their happiness as long
as they lived.
Strong Hans
There were once a man and a woman who had an only child, and
lived quite alone in a soHtary valley. It came to pass that the mother
once went into the wood to gather branches of fir, and took with
her little Hans, who was just two years old. As it was spring-time,
and the child took pleasure in the many-colored flowers, she went
still further onwards with him into the forest. Suddenly two robbers
sprang out of the thicket, seized the mother and child, and carried
them far away into the black forest, where no one ever came from
one year's end to another. The poor woman urgently begged the robbers to set her and her child free, but their hearts were made of
stone, they would not listen to her prayers and entreaties, and drove
her on farther by force.
After they had worked their way through bushes and briars for
about two miles, they came to a rock where there was a door, at
which the robbers knocked and it opened at once. They had to go
through a long dark passage, and at last came into a great cavern,
which was lighted by a fire which burnt on the hearth. On the wall
hung swords, sabers, and other deadly weapons which gleamed in
the light, and in the midst stood a black table at which four other
robbers were sitting gambling, and the captain sat at the head of it.
As soon as he saw the woman he came and spoke to her, and told
her to be at ease and have no fear, they would do nothing to hurt
her, but she must look after the housekeeping, and if she kept everything in order, she should not fare ill with them. Thereupon they
gave her something to eat, and showed her a bed where she might
sleep with her child.
The woman stayed many years with the robbers, and Hans grew
tall and strong. His mother told him stories, and taught him to read
an old book of tales about knights which she found in the cave.
When Hans was nine years old, he made himself a strong club out
of a branch of fir, hid it behind the bed, and then went to his
mother and said, "Dear mother, pray tell me who is my father; I
must and will know." His mother was silent and would not tell him, that he might not become home-sick; moreover she knew that the
godless robbers would not let him go away, but it almost broke her
heart that Hans should not go to his father. In the night, when the
Strong Hans 501
robbers came home from their robbing expedition, Hans brought
out his club, stood before the captain, and said, "1 now wish to know who is my father, and if thou dost not at once tell me I will
strike thee down." Then the captain laughed, and gave Hans such a box on the ear that he rolled under the table. Hans got up again,
held his tongue, and thought, "I will wait another year and then try
again, perhaps I shaU do better then." When the year was over, he brought out his club again, rubbed the dust off it, looked at it well,
and said, "It is a stout strong club." At night the robbers came home, drank one jug of wine after another, and their heads began to be heavy. Then Hans brought out
his club, placed himself before the captain, and asked him who was
his father. But the captain again gave him such a vigorous box on
the ear that Hans rolled under the table, but it was not long before
he was up again, and beat the captain and the robbers so with his
club, that they could no longer move either their arms or their legs.
His mother stood in a comer full of admiration of his bravery and
strength. When Hans had done his work, he went to his mother,
and said, "Now I have shown myself to be in earnest, but now I
must also know who is my father." "Dear Hans," answered the
mother, "come, we will go and seek him until we find him." She took from the captain the key to the entrance-door, and Hans
fetched a great meal-sack and packed into it gold and silver, and whatsoever else he could find that was beautiful, until it was full,
and then he took it on his back. They left the cave, but how Hans
did open his eyes when he came out of the darkness into daylight,
and saw the green forest, and the flowers, and the birds, and the
morning sun in the sky. He stood there and wondered at everything
just as if he had not been very wise. His mother looked for the way
home, and when they had walked for a couple of hours, they got
safely into their lonely valley and to their little house.
The father was sitting in the doorway. He wept for joy when he
recognized his wife and heard that Hans was his son, for he had
long regarded them both as dead. But Hans, although he was not
twelve years old, was a head taller than his father. They went into
the Httle room together, but Hans had scarcely put his sack on the
bench by the stove, than the whole house began to crack— the bench broke down and then the floor, and the heavy sack fell
through into the cellar. "God save us I" cried the father, "what's
that? Now you have broken our little house to pieces!" *T)on't grow
any gray hairs about that, dear father," answered Hans; "there, in
that sack, is more than is wanting for a new house." The father and
502 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
Hans at once began to build a new house; to buy cattle and land,
and to keep a farm. Hans ploughed the fields, and when he followed the plough and pushed it into the ground, the bullocks had
scarcely any need to draw.
Next spring Hans said, "Keep all the money and get a walking- stick that weighs a hundred-weight made for me that I may go atraveling." When the wished-for stick was ready, he left his father s house, went forth, and came to a deep, dark forest. There he heard
something cnmching and crackling, looked around, and saw a fir
tree which was wound round like a rope from the bottom to the
top, and when he looked upwards he saw a great fellow who had
laid hold of the tree and was twisting it like a willow-wand.
"Hollol" cried Hans, ''What are you doing up there?" The fellow
replied, "I got some faggots together yesterday and am twisting a
rope for them." "That is what I hke," thought Hans, "he has some
strength," and he called to him, "Leave that alone, and come with
me." The feUow came down, and he was taller by a whole head
than Hans, and Hans was not little. "Your name is now Fir-twister," said Hans to him.
Thereupon they went further and heard something knocking and
hammering with such force that the ground shook at every stroke.
Shortly afterwards they came to a mighty rock, before which a
giant was standing and striking great pieces of it away with his fist.
When Hans asked what he was about, he answered, "At night, when I want to sleep, bears, wolves, and other vermin of that kind
come, which sniff and snu£Be about me and won't let me rest; so I want to build myself a house and lay myself inside it, so that I may
have some peace." "Oh, indeed," thought Hans, "I can make use of
this one also"; and said to him, "Leave your house-building alone,
and go with me; you shall be called Rock-spHtter." The man con- sented, and they all three roamed through the forest, and wherever
they went the wild beasts were terrified, and ran away from them.
In the evening they came to an old deserted castle, went up into
it, and laid themselves down in the hall to sleep. The next morning
Hans went into the garden. It had run quite wild, and was full of
thorns and bushes. And as he was thus waUdng round about, a wild
boar rushed at him; he, however, gave it such a blow with his club
that it fell directly. He took it on his shoulders and carried it in,
and they put it on a spit, roasted it, and enjoyed themselves. Then
they arranged that each day, in turn, they should go out hunting,
and one should stay at home, and cook nine pounds of meat for
Strong Hans 503
each of them. Fir-twister stayed at home the first, and Hans and
Rock-splitter went out hunting.
When Fir-twister was busy cooking, a little shriveled-up old
mannikin came to him in the castle, and asked for some meat. "Be
oflF, sly hypocrite," he answered, "you need no meat." But how as- tonished Fir-twister was when the little insignificant dwarf sprang
up at him, and belabored him so with his fists that he could not defend himself, but fell on the ground and gasped for breathi The
dwai-f did not go away until he had thoroughly vented his anger on him. When the two others came home from hunting, Fir-twister
said nothing to them of the old mannikin and of the blows which
he himself had received, and thought, "When they stay at home,
they may just try their chance with the fittle scrubbing-brush"; and the mere thought of that gave him pleasure already.
The next day Rock-splitter stayed at home, and he fared just as
Fir-twister had done, he was very ill-treated by the dwarf because
.he was not willing to give him any meat. When the others came
home in the evening. Fir-twister easily saw what he had suffered,
but both kept silence, and thought, "Hans also must taste some of
that soup." Hans, who had to stay at home the next day, did his work in the
kitchen as it had to be done, and as he was standing skimming the
pan, the dwarf came and without more ado demanded a bit of
meat. Then Hans thought, "He is a poor wretch, I will give him
some of my share, that the others may not run short," and handed
him a bit. When the dwarf had devom-ed it, he again asked for
some meat, and good-natured Hans gave it to him, and told him it
was a handsome piece, and that he was to be content with it. But
the dwarf begged again for the third time. "You are shameless 1" said Hans, and gave him none. Then the malicious dwarf wanted to
spring on him and treat him as he had treated Fir-twister and
Rock-spHtter, but he had got to the wrong man. Hans, without ex- erting himself much, gave him a couple of blows which made him
jump down the castle steps. Hans was about to nm after him, but
fell right over him, for he was so tall. When he rose up again, the
dwarf had got the start of him. Hans hurried after him as far as the
forest, and saw him slip into a hole in the rock. Hans now went
home, but he had marked the spot.
When the two others came back, they were surprised that Hans
was so well. He told them what had happened, and then they no
longer concealed how it had fared with them. Hans laughed and
said, "It served you quite right; why were you so greedy with yoiu*
504 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
meat? It is a disgrace that you who are so big should have let yourselves be beaten by the dwarf." Thereupon they took a basket and a rope, and all three went to the hole in the rock into which the
dwarf had sHpped, and let Hans and his club down in the basket.
When Hans had reached the bottom, he found a door, and when
he opened it a maiden was sitting there who was lovely as any picture, nay, so beautiful that no words can express it, and by her side
sat the dwarf and grinned at Hans like a sea-catl She, however, was
bound with chains, and looked so mournfully at him that Hans felt
great pity for her, and thought to himself, "You must deliver her
out of the power of the wicked dwarf," and gave him such a blow with his club that he fell down dead. Immediately the chains fell
from the maiden, and Hans was enraptured with her beauty.
She told him she was a King's daughter whom a savage count had stolen away from her home, and imprisoned there among the
rocks, because she would have nothing to say to him. The count
had, however, set the dwarf as a watchman, and he had made her
bear misery and vexation enough. And now Hans placed the maiden
in the basket and had her drawn up; the basket came down
again, but Hans did not trust his two companions, and thought,
"They have already shown themselves to be false, and told me nothing about the dwarf; who knows what design they may have
against me?" So he put his club in the basket, and it was lucky he did; for when the basket was half-way up, they let it fall again, and
if Hans had really been sitting in it he would have been killed. But
now he did not know how he was to work his way out of the
depths, and when he turned it over and over in his mind he found
no counsel. *lt is indeed sad," said he to himself, "that I have to
waste away down here," and as he was thus walking backwards and forwards, he once more came to the Httle chamber where the
maiden had been sitting, and saw that the dwarf had a ring on his
finger which shone and sparkled.
Then he drew it off and put it on, and when he turned it roimd
on his finger, he suddenly heard something rustle over his head. He
looked up and saw spirits of the air hovering above, who told him
he was their master, and asked what his desire might be. Hans was
at first struck dumb, but afterwards he said that they were to carry
him above again. They obeyed instantly, and it was just as if he
had flown up himself. When, however, he was above again, he
found no one in sight. Fir-twister and Rock-splitter had hurried
away, and had taken the beautiful maiden with them. But Hans
The Blue Light 505
turned the ring, and the spirits of the air came and told him that the two were on the sea.
Hans ran and ran without stopping, imtil he came to the seashore, and there far, far out on the water, he perceived a little boat
in which his faithless comrades were sitting; and in fierce anger he
leapt, without thinking what he was doing, club in hand, into the
water, and began to swim, but the club, which weighed a hundredweight, dragged him deep down until he was all but drowned.
Then in the very nick of time he turned his ring, and immediately
the spirits of the air came and bore him as swift as lightning into
the boat. He swimg his club and gave his wicked comrades the reward they merited and threw them into the water, and then he
sailed with the beautiful maiden, who had been in the greatest
alarm, and whom he delivered for the second time, home to her father and mother, and married her, and all rejoiced exceedingly.
The Blue Light
A SOLDIER had served the King faithfully for many years, but when
the war came to an end could serve no longer because of the many
wounds he had received. The King said to him, *Tfou may return to your home, I need you no longer, and you will not receive any
more money, for he only receives wages who renders me service for
them." Then the soldier did not know how to earn a living, went
away greatly troubled, and walked the whole day, until in the eve- ning he entered a forest.
When darkness came on, he saw a light, which he went up to,
and came to a house wherein lived a witch. "Do give me one
night's lodging, and a little to eat and drink," said he to her, "or I
shall starve." "Ohol" she answered, "who gives anything to a runa- way soldier? Yet will I be compassionate, and take you in, if you
will do what I wish." "What do you wish?" said the soldier. "That
you should dig all round my garden for me, tomorrow." The soldier consented, and next day labored with all his strength, but could not
finish it by the evening. *1 see well enough," said the witch, "that you can do no more today, but I will keep you yet another night, in
payment for which you must tomorrow chop me a load of wood,
and make it small." The soldier spent the whole day in doing it, and
5o6 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
in the evening the witch proposed that he should stay one night
more. 'Tomorrow, you shall only do me a very trifling piece of work. Behind my house, there is an old dry well, into which my
light has fallen; it burns blue, and never goes out, and you shall
bring it up agEiin for me." Next day the old woman took him to the well, and let him down
in a basket. He found the blue light, and made her a signal to draw
him up again. She did draw him up, but when he came near the
edge, she stretched down her hand and wanted to take the blue
light away from him. "No," said he, perceiving her evil intention, T wiU not give you the hght until I am standing with both feet
upon the ground." The witch fell into a passion, let him down again into the well, and went away.
The poor soldier fell without injury on the moist ground, and the
blue light went on burning, but of what use was that to him? He
saw very well that he could not escape death. He sat for a while
very sorrowfully, then suddenly he felt in his pocket and fotmd his
tobacco pipe, which was still half full. "This shall be my last pleasure," thought he, pulled it out, lit it at the blue Hght and began to smoke. When the smoke had circled about the cavern, suddenly
a little black dwarf stood before him, and said, "Lord, what are
your commands?" "What commands have I to give you?" repHed
the soldier, quite astonished. "I must do everything you bid me,"
said the little man. "Good," said the soldier; "then in the first place
help me out of this well." The little man took him by the hand, and led him through an
underground passage, but he did not forget to take the blue Hght
with him. On the way the dwarf showed him the treasures which the
witch had collected and hidden there, and the soldier took as much
gold as he could carry. When he was above, he said to the Httle
man, "Now go and bind the old witch, and carry her before the
judge." In a short time she, with frightful cries, came riding by, as swift as the vidnd on a wild tom-cat, nor was it long after that before the Httle man reappeared. "It is aU done," said he, "and the witch is already hanging on the gallows. What further commands
has my lord?" inquired the dwarf. "At this moment, none," answered the soldier; "you can return home, only be at hand immediately, if I summon you." "Nothing more is needed than that you should Hght your pipe at the blue Hght, and I will appear before
you at once." Thereupon he vanished from his sight. The soldier returned to the town from which he had come. He
went to the best inn, ordered himself handsome clothes, and then
The Blue Light 507
bade the landlord furnish him a room as handsomely as possible.
When it was ready and the soldier had taken possession of it, he
summoned the little black mannildn and said, "I have served the King faithfully, but he has dismissed me, and left me to hunger,
and now I want to take my revenge." "What am I to do?" asked the
little man. "Late at night, when the King's daughter is in bed, bring
her here in her sleep, she shall do servant's work for me." The
mannildn said, "That is an easy thing for me to do, but a very dangerous thing for you, for if it is discovered, you v^dll fare ill." When
twelve o'clock had struck, the door sprang open, and the mannikin
carried in the Princess. "Aha! are you there?" cried the soldier, "get
to your work at oncel Fetch the broom and sweep the chamber." When she had done this, he ordered her to come to his chair, and
then he stretched out his feet and said, "Pull oflF my boots for me," and then he threw them in her face, and made her pick them up
again, and clean and brighten them. She, however, did everything
he bade her, without opposition, silently and with half -shut eyes. When the first cock crowed, the mannikin carried her back to the
royal palace, and laid her in her bed.
Next morning when the Princess arose, she went to her father,
and told him that she had had a very strange dream. "I was carried
through the streets with the rapidity of lightning," said she, "and
taken into a soldier's room, and I had to wait upon him like a ser- vant, sweep his room, clean his boots, and do all lands of menial
work. It was only a dream, and yet I am just as tired as if I really
had done everything." "The dream may have been true," said the
King, "I will give you a piece of advice. Fill your pocket full of peas, and make a small hole in it, and then if you are carried away
again, they will fall out and leave a track in the streets." But unseen by the King, the mannikin was standing beside him when he said
that, and heard all. At night when the sleeping Princess was again
carried through the streets, some peas certainly did faU out of her
pocket, but they made no track, for the crafty mannikin had just
before scattered peas in every street there was. And again the Princess was compelled to do servant's work until cock-crow. Next morning the King sent his people out to seek the track, but
it was all in vain, for in every street poor children were sitting,
picking up peas, and saying, "It must have rained peas, last night."
*We must think of something else," said the King; "keep your shoes on when you go to bed, and before you come back from the
place where you are taken, hide one of them there; I will soon contrive to find it." The black mannikin heard this plot, and at nigh<-
5o8 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
when the soldier again ordered him to bring the Princess, revealed
it to him, and told him that he knew of no expedient to cotmteract
this stratagem, and that if the shoe were found in the soldier's
house it would go badly with him. "Do what I bid you," replied the soldier, and again this third night the Princess was obliged to
work like a servant, but before she went away, she hid her shoe under the bed.
Next morning the King had the entire town searched for his
daughter's shoe. It was found at the soldier's, and the soldier him- self, who at the entreaty of the dwarf had gone outside the gate,
was soon brought back, and thrown into prison. In his flight he had
forgotten the most valuable things he had, the blue light and the
gold, and had only one ducat in his pocket. And now, loaded with
chains, he was standing at the window of his dungeon, when he
chanced to see one of his comrades passing by. The soldier tapped
at the pane of glass, and when this man came up, said to him, "Be so kind as to fetch me the small bimdle I have left lying in the inn,
and I wiU give you a ducat for doing it." His comrade ran thither and brought him what he wanted. As soon as the soldier was alone
again, he lighted his pipe and summoned the black mannikin.
"Have no fear," said the latter to his master, "Go wheresoever they take you, and let them do what they wiU, only take the blue light
with you." Next day the soldier was tried, and though he had done nothing
wicked, the judge condemned him to death. When he was led forth
to die, he begged a last favor of the King. "What is it?" asked the
King. "That I may smoke one more pipe on my way." "You may
smoke three," answered the King, 'Taut do not imagine that I will
spare your Hfe." Then the soldier pulled out his pipe and lighted it at the blue light, and as soon as a few wreaths of smoke had ascended, the mannikin was there with a small cudgel in his hand,
and said, "What does my lord command?" "Strike down to earth that false judge there, and his constable, and spare not the King
who has treated me so iU." Then the mannikin fell on them like lightning, darting this way and that way, and whosoever was so
much as touched by his cudgel fell to earth, and did not venture to
stir again. The King was terrified. He threw himself on the soldier's mercy, and merely to be allowed to live at all, gave him his king- dom for his own, and the Princess to wife.
The Fisherman and His Wife
There was once a fisherman and his wife who lived together in a
hovel by the sea-shore, and the fisherman went out every day with
his hook and line to catch fish, and he angled and angled.
One day he was sitting with his rod and looking into the clear
water, and he sat and sat.
At last down went the line to the bottom of the water, and when
he drew it up he found a great flounder on the hook. And the
flounder said to him, "Fisherman, listen to me; let me go. I am not a real fish but an enchanted Prince. What good shall I be to you if
you land me? I shall not taste well; so put me back into the water
again, and let me swim away."
"Well," said the fisherman, "no need of so many words about the
matter; as you can speak I had much rather let you swim away." Then he put him back into the clear water, and the flounder sank
to the bottom, leaving a long streak of blood behind him. Then the
fisherman got up and went home to his wife in their hovel.
"Well, husband," said the wife, "have you caught nothing
today?" "No," said the man— "that is, I did catch a flounder, but as
he said he was an enchanted Prince, I let him go again." "Then, did
you wish for nothing?" said the wife. "No," said the man; "what should I wish for?"
"Oh dear!" said the wife; "and it is so dreadful always to live in this evil-smelling hovel; you might as well have wished for a little
cottage. Go again and call him; tell him we want a little cottage, I
daresay he will give it us; go, and be quick." And when he went back, the sea was green and yeUow, and not
nearly so clear. So he stood and said,
"O man, O man!— if man you be. Or flounder, flounder, in the seaSuch a tiresome wife I've got. For she wants what I do not."
Then the flounder came swimming up, and said, "Now then, what does she want?"
"Oh," said the man, "you know when I caught you my wife says I ought to have wished for something. She does not want to live
510 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
any longer in the hovel, and would rather have a cottage." "Go
home with you," said the flounder, "she has it aheady." So the man went home, and foimd, instead of the hovel, a Httle
cottage, and his wife was sitting on a bench before the door. And
she took him by the hand, and said to him, "Come in and see if this
is not a great improvement." So they went in, and there was a little house-place and a beautiful little bed-room, a kitchen and larder, with aU sorts of fimiiture,
and iron and brass ware of the very best. And at the back was a little yard with fowls and ducks, and a little garden full of green veg- etables and fruit.
"Look," said the wife, "is not that nice?" "Yes," said the man, "if
this can only last we shall be very well contented." "We will see
about that," said the wife. And after a meal they went to bed. So all went well for a week or fortnight, when the wife said,
"Look here, husband, the cottage is reaUy too confined, and the yard and garden are so small; I think the flounder had better get us a
larger house; I should like very much to live in a large stone castle;
so go to your fish and he wiU send us a castle."
"Oh my dear wife," said the man, "the cottage is good enough;
what do we want a castle for?" "We want one," said the wife; "go
along with you; the flounder can give us one."
"Now, wife," said the man, "the flounder gave us the cottage; I
do not like to go to him again, he may be angry." "Go along," said
the wife, "he might just as well give us it as not; do as I sayl" The man felt very reluctant and unwilling; and he said to himself, "It is not the right thing to do"; nevertheless he went. So when he came to the sea-side, the water was purple and dark
blue and gray and thick, and not green and yellow as before. And
he stood and said,
"O man, O man!— if man you be. Or flounder, flounder, in the seaSuch a tiresome wife I've got. For she wants what I do not."
"Now then, what does she want?" said the flounder.
"Oh," said the man, half frightened, "she wants to live in a large
stone castle." "Go home with you, she is already standing before
the door," said the flounder. Then the man went home, as he supposed, but when he got
there, there stood in the place of the cottage a great castle of stone,
The Fisherman and His Wife 511
and his wife was standing on the steps, about to go in; so she took
him by the hand, and said, "Let us enter." With that he went in with her, and in the castle was a great hall
with a marble pavement, and there were a great many servants,
who led them through large doors, and the passages were decked
with tapestry, and the rooms with golden chairs and tables, and
crystal chandeliers hanging from the ceiling; and all the rooms had
carpets. And the tables were covered with eatables and the best
wine for any one who wanted them. And at the back of the house
was a great stable-yard for horses and cattle, and carriages of the
finest; besides, there was a splendid large garden, with the most
beautiful flowers and fine fruit trees, and a pleasance fuU half a
mile long, with deer and oxen and sheep, and everything that heart could wish for.
"Therel" said the wife, "is not this beautiful?" "Oh yes," said the
man, "if it will only last we can live in this fine castle and be very
well contented." "We will see about that," said the wife, "in the
meanwhile we will sleep upon it." With that they went to bed. The next morning the wife was awake first, just at the break of
day, and she looked out and saw from her bed the beautiful country lying all round. The man took no notice of it, so she poked him
in the side with her elbow, and said, "Husband, get up and just look out of the window. Look, just think if we could be King over
all this country! Just go to your fish and tell him we should like to
be King."
"Now, wife," said the man, "what should we be Kings for? I
don't want to be King." "Well," said the wife, "if you don't want to
be King, I will be King."
"Now, wife," said the man, "what do you want to be King for? I
could not ask him such a thing." "Why not?" said the wife, "you
must go directly all the same; I must be King." So the man went, very much put out that his wife should want to
be King.
*Tt is not the right thing to do— not at all the right thing," thought the man. He did not at all want to go, and yet he went all the same.
And when he came to the sea the water was quite dark gray, and
rushed far inland, and had an ill smell. And he stood and said,
"O man, O man!— if man you be. Or flounder, flounder, in the seaSuch a tiresome wife I've got. For she wants what I do not."
512 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
"Now then, what does she want?" said the fish, "Oh dearl" said
the man, "she wants to be King." "Go home with you, she is King
ahready," said the fish. So the man went back, and as he came to the palace he saw it
was very much larger, and had great towers and splendid gateways; the herald stood before the door, and a number of soldiers
with kettle-drums and trumpets.
And when he came inside everything was of marble and gold,
and there were many curtains with great golden tassels. Then he
went through the doors of the saloon to where the great throneroom was, and there was his wife sitting upon a throne of gold and
diamonds, and she had a great golden crown on, and the scepter in
her hand was of pure gold and jewels, and on each side stood six
pages in a row, each one a head shorter than the other. So the man
went up to her and said, "Well, wife, so now you are King!" "Yes,"
said the wife, "now I am King." So then he stood and looked at her, and when he had gazed at
her for some time he said, "Well, wife, this is fine for you to be
KingI Now there is nothing more to wish for." "Oh husband!" said
the wife, seeming quite restless, "I am tired of this aheady. Go to
your fish and tell him that now I am King I must be Emperor."
"Now, wife," said the man, "what do you want to be Emperor
for?" "Husband," said she, "go and tell the fish I want to be Emperor." "Oh dearl" said the man, "he could not do it— I cannot ask him
such a thing. There is but one Emperor at a time; the fish can't possibly make any one Emperor— indeed he can't."
"Now, look here," said the wife, "I am King, and you are only my husband, so wiU you go at once? Go alongl for if he was able to
make me King he is able to make me Emperor; and I will and must
be Emperor, so go alongl" So he was obhged to go; and as he went he felt very uncomfortable about it, and he thought to himself, "It is not at aU the right thing to do; to want to be Emperor is reaUy going too far; the
flounder wiU soon be beginning to get tired of this." With that he came to the sea, and the water was quite black and
thick, and the foam flew, and the wind blew, and the man was
terrified. But he stood and said,
"O m43,n, O man!— if man you he. Or flounder, flounder, in the seaSuch a tiresome wife I've got. For she wants what I do not."
The Fisherman and His Wife 513
"What is it now?" said the fish. "Oh dearl" said the man, "my
wife wants to be Emperor." "Go home with you," said the fish, "she
is Emperor abready." So the man went home, and found the castle adorned with
polished marble and alabaster figures, and golden gates. The troops
were being marshaled before the door, and they were blowing
trumpets and beating drums and cymbals; and when he entered he
saw barons and earls and dukes waiting about like servants; and
the doors were of bright gold. And he saw his wife sitting upon a
throne made of one entire piece of gold, and it was about two miles
high; and she had a great golden crown on, which was about three
yards high, set with brilliants and carbimcles; and in one hand she
held the scepter, and in the other the globe; and on both sides of
her stood pages in two rows, all arranged according to their size,
from the most enormous giant of two miles high to the tiniest dwarf
of the size of my httle finger; and before her stood earls and dukes in crowds.
So the man went up to her and said, "Well, wife, so now you are
Emperor." "Yes," said she, "now I am Emperor." Then he went and sat down and had a good look at her, and then
he said, "Well now, wife, there is nothing left to be, now you are
Emperor." "What are you talking about, husband?" said she; *T am
Emperor, and next I will be Popel so go and tell the fish so."
"Oh dearl" said the man, "what is it that you don't want? You can never become Pope; there is but one Pope in Christendom, and
the fish can't possibly do it." "Husband," said she, "no more words
about it; I must and wiU be Pope; so go along to the fish."
"Now, wife," said the man, "how can I ask him such a thing? It is too bad— it is asking a Httle too much; and, besides, he could not
do it." "What rubbishi" said the wife; "if he could make me Em- peror he can make me Pope. Go along and ask him; I am Emperor,
and you are only my husband, so go you must." So he went, feeling very frightened, and he shivered and shook,
and his knees trembled; and there arose a great wind, and the
clouds flew by, and it grew very dark, and the sea rose mountains
high, and the ships were tossed about, and the sky was partly blue
in the middle, but at the sides very dark and red, as in a great
tempest. And he felt very despondent, and stood trembling and said,
"O man, O man!— if man you be. Or flounder, flounder, in the sea—
514 GrimrrCs Complete Fairy Tales
Such a tiresome wife I've got. For she wants what I do not."
'Well, what now?" said the fish. "Oh dearl" said the man, "she
wants to be Pope." "Go home with you, she is Pope akeady," said the fish.
So he went home, and he found himself before a great church,
with palaces all roimd. He had to make his way through a crowd of
people; and when he got inside he found the place lighted up with
thousands and thousands of lights; and his wife was clothed in a
golden garment, and sat upon a very high throne, and had three
golden crowns on, all in the greatest priestly pomp; and on both
sides of her there stood two rows of lights of all sizes— from the size
of the longest tower to the smallest rushlight, and all the Emperors
and Kings were kneeling before her and kissing her foot.
"Well, wife," said the man, and sat and stared at her, "so you are
Pope." "Yes," said she, "now I am Popel" And he went on gazing at her till he felt dazzled, as if he were
sitting in the sun. And after a little time he said, "Well, now, wife,
what is there left to be, now you are Pope?" And she sat up very stiff and straight, and said nothing.
And he said again, "Well, wife, I hope you are contented at last
with being Pope; you can be nothing more."
"We will see about that," said the wife. With that they both went to bed; but she was as far as ever from being contented, and she
could not get to sleep for thinking of what she should like to be next.
The husband, however, slept as fast as a top after his busy day;
but the wife tossed and turned from side to side the whole night
through, thinking all the while what she could be next, but nothing
would occur to her; and when she saw the red dawn she slipped off
the bed, and sat before the window to see the sun rise, and as it
came up she said, "Ah, I have iti Cannot I make the sun and moon
to rise? Husbandl" she cried, and stuck her elbow in his ribs, "wake
up, and go to your fish, and tell him I want to be God." The man was so fast asleep that when he started up he fell out of
bed. Then he shook himself together, and opened his eyes and said,
"Oh wife, what did you say?"
"Husband," said she, "if I cannot get the power of making the sun and moon rise when I want them, I shall never have another
quiet hour. Go to the fish and tell him so."
"Oh wifel" said the man, and fell on his knees to her, "the fish
The Good Bargain 515
can really not do that for you. I grant you he could make you Emperor and Pope. Do be contented with that, I beg of you."
And she became wild with impatience, and screamed out, "I can
wait no longer, go at oncel I want to be God!" And so oflF he went as well as he could for fright. And a dreadful
storm arose, so that he could hardly keep his feet; and the houses
and trees were blown down, and the mountains trembled, and
rocks fell in the sea; the sky was quite black, and it thundered and
lightninged; and the waves, crowned with foam, ran mountains
high. So he cried out, without being able to hear his own words,
"O man, O man!— if man you be. Or flounder, flounder, in the seaSuch a tiresome wife I've got. For she wants what I do not."
"Well, what now?" said the flounder.
"Oh dear!" said the man, "she wants to be God!" "Go home with
you!" said the flounder, "you will find her the way she was— in the
old hovel." And there they are sitting to this very day.
The Good Bargain
A PEASANT had led his cow to the market and sold her for seven
dollars. On his way home he had to pass a pond, but long before he
reached it he could hear the frogs crying "Akt! akt! akt! akt!"**
"Yes, I hear you," he said, "screaming out in your snug quarters;
but it's seven I have received, not eight." As soon as he reached the
water he exclaimed: "Stupid creatures that you are, don't you know better? Seven dollars are not eight dollars."
The frogs, taking no heed, continued to cry "Akt! aktl akt!"
"Now," said *^he peasant, "if you do not believe me, I can count
it out to you"; and he took the money out of his pocket and counted out his seven dollars in groschen.
The frogs cared nothing for the peasant's reckoning, but went on
croaking "Akt! akt! akt! akt!"
"Oh!" cried the peasant in a rage, "do you know better how to
* The word "acht" is German for eight.
5i6 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
count than I do?" and he threw the money into the water right in the midst of them. Then he stood and waited till they were ready to
return his property to him, but the frogs were constant to their first
opinion and screamed out still louder, "Aktl aktl aktl aktl" and did not attempt to throw the money back again to him.
He waited for a good while till evening came on, and he knew he
must go home. Then he abused the frogs, and cried, "You water plashersl you thick heads I you blind eyesl With your great jaws, you
can scream enough to split one's ears, but you cannot count seven dollars; and do you think I am going to stay here and wait till you
are ready?" Then he walked away very fast, but he heard the frogs
still croaking "Aktl aktl" for a long distance, and he arrived home quite out of humor.
After a time he bought another cow, which he slaughtered, and
while reckoning how much he should get by the sale of the flesh, as
well as the skin, he hoped to make a good bargain with profits,
even with the loss caused by the obstinacy of the frogs.
So he started oflF to the town to sell his dead cow, but on arriving
at the butcher's stall he saw a pack of hounds, who all surrounded
him, barking and smelling at the meat. "Wasl wasl"* they cried.
"Ah, yesl" said the peasant, "it is all very well to say, *What?
what?' as if you wanted to know what I have got here, and you know it is meat all the while."
There was no one to watch the butcher's shop but a large house dog, and the countryman had often heard his master say how true
and faithful he was. So he said to him, "If I leave this meat here,
will you answer for these friends of yours that it shan't be
touched?" "Wasl wasl" cried the dog; while the others barked
"Wasl wasl" and sprang at the meat.
"Oh, Weill" said the peasant to the butcher's dog, "as you have promised, I will leave the meat for your master to sell; but, remember, I must have the money in three days, and if he doesn't
send it, I shall come for it." Thereupon he laid the meat down on the coimter, and turned to go. The dogs aU ran round it barking
"Wasl wasl" and the peasant heard them for a long distance. "Ahl"
he said, "they are all longing for a piece; but it's all right, the big one is answerable for them."
Three days passed, and the countryman made himself quite comfortable in the thought of what he was to receive. "1 shall have
• The German "was" is translated "what." It is used instead of "bow-wow" for the bark of a dog.
The Good Bargain 517
plenty of money in my pocket by tomorrow evening," he said in a contented tone.
But the morrow came, and no money. He waited two days and
then said, "I can't stand this; I must go and demand my money." The butcher at first thought he was talking about a sparrow.
"Sparrow, indeedl" replied the peasant. "I want my money for the meat I left under the care of your great dog three days ago— the
flesh of a whole cow." At this the butcher flew in a rage, and seizing a broom, laid it
over the peasant's shoulders and drove him out of the shop.
"Just wait," cried the peasant; "there is some justice after all left
in the world." And away he went to the castle, where, as it hap- pened on that day, the King himself sat as chief magistrate, with
his daughter by his side.
"What is your trouble?" asked the King. "Alas! Your Majesty," he
replied, "the frogs and the dogs have taken all I possess, and when I
asked the butcher for my money, he beat me with a broomstick." And then he related in a confused manner aU that had occmred.
On hearing the countryman's story, the King's daughter burst into a fit of laughter, and laughed so loudly that for some minutes
the King could not speak. At length he said, "I carmot restore to you the money you have lost, but I can give you my daughter in
marriage. She has never dining her whole Hfe laughed till now. I
long ago promised her as a wife to the first man who could make
her laugh, and you are that man, so you may thank Heaven for
your good fortune."
"Ah, my lord Kingl" replied the peasant, "I cannot marry the Princess; I have one wife at home already, and she is quite too
much for me to manage; there is no room for another in our chimney comer."
Then was the King angry, and said, "You are a rude clownl"
"Ah, my lord Kingl" he replied, "what can you expect from a pig
but a grunt?" and he turned to go.
"Stay!" cried the King, calling him back; "I mean you to have some reward after all. Five hundred times as much as you have lost
shall be ready for you if you come here again in three days." The peasant looked so joyful as he passed out after hearing this
that the sentinel asked him the cause. "You have made the Princess
laugh, I hear. What reward are you to have?" "Five hrmdred dollars," he replied.
"Why, what wiU you do with all that money?" asked the sentinel.
"You may as well give me some." "1 will, if you like," he said; "and
5i8 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
if you will go with me to the King in three days, he shall pay you
two hundred dollars instead of me"; and away he went. A Jew, who was standing near, overheard this promise, and running after the peasant, pulled him by the sleeve, and said, "You are a lucky fellow, friend, to have all that money promised you, but
you must wait three days for it; would you not Mice to receive it at
once, cash down?" "I should, indeed," rephed the peasant. "How
can it be managed?" "Oh, very easilyl You shall give me an order to receive the three hundred dollars, and I will pay you the amount in
silver and small coin." So the bill of exchange was dravini, and the money paid; but the
Jew charged such enormous interest, and some of the coins were so
bad, that the peasant did not get much, after all.
At the end of three days the peasant went to the King, according
to his command. "You must open your pockets very wide to receive
all these dollars," said the King.
"Ah, nol" cried the peasant, "they do not belong to me. Two hundred I have promised to the sentinel, and I have given a Jew a
bill to receive three hundred, as he gave me cash for it, so that I
have justly nothing to receive." While he spoke in came the soldier and the Jew, who demanded what they had obtained from the
peasant, and persisted that the money was justly theirs.
At first the King could not help laughing at the countryman's folly, and then he became angry at the conduct of the Jew and the
soldier. "So," he said to the peasant, "as you have been so foolish as to give up your money, before it even belonged to you, to strangers,
I suppose I must make you some compensation. Go into that room
opposite, and help yourself to as much money as your pockets will
hold." The countryman did not require to be told twice; he went, as he was told, and filled his wide pockets to overflowing.
Away he started to the inn to count his money, and the Jew
sneaked after him and heard him talking to him«elf. "Now. if T had been a knave and hidden all this from the King, he would never
have allowed me to take this money. I wash I knew how much I
had. Oh, if the King had only told me what amount I was to take.
I'm so afraid I may have taken more than I ought."
"Ah! ah I" muttered the Jew, "he is grumbling even now, and speaking disrespectfully of my lord the King. Catch me quarreling
with such a simi of money because I couldn't count it." The Jew had spoken loud enough for the King to hear, and he
called him, and desired him to fetch the ungrateful man again be-
Prudent Hans 519
fore His Majesty. "You must appear before the King immediately!"
cried the Jew. "There must be no excuse."
"Indeed, I cannot," he rephed. "Whoever heard of a man with such a heap of gold in his pockets as I have, going before the King
in such a ragged coat as this?" The Jew, seeing that the peasant was determined, and fearing
that the wrath of the King would cool, promised to lend him a coat,
which was very good and nearly new. "I lend it you for true friendship's sake," he said; "and that is seldom done in the world."
So the peasant put it on and went into the King's presence. But when the King repeated what he had been told by the Jew, the
peasant exclaimed, "Your Majesty, it is all false; there is never a
true word out of that Jew's mouth. I dare say he will aflSrm that the
coat I have on belongs to him."
"What do you mean?" screamed the Jew. "You know it is my coat! I lent it you out of pure friendship, that you might appear before the King!"
"Yes, of course, to hear your lies about me, and get punished by
having the money taken from me," replied the peasant. Then he repeated what he had really said at the inn; and the King dismissed
them both, saying that the Jew's word was evidently not to be taken, and therefore the countryman might keep the coat as his
own as some recompense for the Jew's false accusation. The peasant went home joyfully to count the gold in his pockets,
and said to himself, "This time, at least, I have made a good bargain."
Prudent Hans
One day, Hans's mother said, "Where are you going, Hans?" Hans
answered, "To Gretel's, mother."
"Manage well, Hans."
"All right! Good-bye, mother.**
"Good-bye, Hans."
Then Hans came to Gretel's.
"Good morning, Gretel."
"Good morning, Hans. What have you brought me today?"
"1 have brought nothing, but I want something."
520 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
So Gretel gave Hans a needle; and then he said, "Good-bye, Gretel," and she said, "Good-bye, Hans." Hans carried the needle away with him, and stuck it in a hay-cart
that was going along, and he followed it home.
"Good evening, mother."
"Good evening, Hans. Where have you been?"
"To Gretel's, mother."
"What did you take her?"
"I took nothing, but I brought away something."
"What did Gretel give you?"
"A needle, mother."
"What did you do with it, Hans?"
"Stuck it in the hay-cart."
'That was very stupid of you, Hans. You should have stuck it in
your sleeve."
"All right, motherl I'll do better next time."
When next time came, Hans's mother said, "Where are you
going, Hans?" "To Gretel's, mother."
"Manage well, Hans."
"All right. Good-bye, mother."
"Good-bye, Hans." Then Hans came to Gretel.
"Good morning, Gretel."
"Good morning, Hans. What have you brought me today?"
"I've brought nothing, but I want something."
So Gretel gave Hans a knife, and then he said, "Good-bye, Gretel," and she said, "Good-bye, Hans." Hans took the knife away with him, and stuck it in his sleeve, and went home.
"Good evening, mother."
"Good evening, Hans. Where have you been?" "To Gretel's."
"What did you take her?"
"I took nothing, but I brought away something."
"What did Gretel give you, Hans?"
"A knife, mother."
"What did you do vidth it, Hans?"
"Stuck it in my sleeve, mother."
"That was very stupid of you, Hans. You should have put it in
your pocket." "All right, motherl I'll do better next time."
Prudent Hans 521
When next time came, Hans's mother said, "Where to, Hans?"
"To Gretel's, mother."
"Manage well, Hans."
"All right! Good-bye, mother."
"Good-bye, Hans."
So Hans came to Gretel's.
"Good morning, Gretel."
"Good morning, Hans. What have you brought me today?"
"I've brought nothing, but I want to take away something."
So Gretel gave Hans a young goat; then he said, "Good-bye, Gretel," and she said, "Good-bye, Hans." So Hans carried ofiE the goat, and tied its legs together, and put it
in his pocket, and by the time he got home it was suffocated.
"Good evening, mother."
"Good evening, Hans. Where have you been?"
"To Gretel's, mother."
'"What did you take her, Hans?"
"I took nothing, but I brought away something."
"What did Gretel give you, Hans?"
"A goat, mother."
"What did you do with it, Hans?"
"Put it in my pocket, mother."
"That was very stupid of you, Hans. You should have tied a cord
round its neck, and led it home."
"All right, mother! I'll do better next time."
Then when next time came, "Where to, Hans?"
"To Gretel's, mother."
"Manage weU, Hans."
"All right! Good-bye, mother."
"Good-bye, Hans."
Then Hans came to Gretel's.
"Good morning, Gretel."
"Good morning, Hans. What have you brought me today?"
"I've brought nothing, but I want to take away something."
So Gretel gave Hans a piece of bacon; then he said, "Good-bye,
Gretel."
She said, "Good-bye, Hans." Hans took the bacon, and tied a string round it, and dragged it
after him on his way home, and the dogs came and ate it up, so
that when he got home he had the string in his hand, and nothing at the other end of it.
"Good evening, mother."
522 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
"Good evening, Hans. Where have you been?" **To Gretel's, mother."
"What did you take her, Hans?"
"I took her nothing, but I brought away something."
**What did Gretel give you, Hans?"
"A piece of bacon, mother."
"What did you do with it, Hans?"
"1 tied a piece of string to it, and led it home, but the dogs ate it,
mother."
"That was very stupid of you, Hans. You ought to have carried it
on your head."
"All rightl rU do better next tune, mother."
When next time came, "Where to, Hans?"
"To Gretel's, mother."
"Manage weU, Hans."
"All rightl Good-bye, mother."
"Good-bye, Hans." Then Hans came to GreteFs.
"Good morning, Gretel."
"Good morning, Hans. What have you brought me?"
*1 have brought nothing, but I want to take away something." So Gretel gave Hans a calf.
"Good-bye, Gretel."
"Good-bye, Hans." Hans took the calf, and set it on his head, and carried it home, and the calf scratched his face.
"Good evening, mother."
"Good evening, Hans. Where have you been?" "To Gretel's, mother."
"What did you take her?"
"I took nothing, but I brought away something."
"What did Gretel give you, Hans?" "A calf, mother."
"What did you do with the calf, Hans?"
"I carried it home on my head, but it scratched my face."
"That was very stupid of you, Hans. You ought to have led home
the calf, and tied it to the manger."
"AU rightl I'll do better next time, mother." When next time came, "Where to, Hans?"
"To Gretel's, mother."
"Manage well, Hans."
"All right, motherl Good-bye."
Hans in Luck 523
"Good-bye, Haiw."
Then Hans came to Gretel's.
"Good morning, Gretel."
"Good morning, Hans, What have you brought me today?"
"I have brought nothing, but I want to take away something."
Then Gretel said to Hans, "You shall take away me." Then Hans took Gretel, and tied a rope round her neck, and led
her home, and fastened her up to the manger, and went to his mother.
"Good evening, mother."
"Good evening, Hans. Where have you been?"
"To Gretel's, mother."
"What did you take her, Hans?"
"Nothing, mother."
"What did Gretel give you, Hans?"
"Nothing but herself, mother."
"Where have you left Gretel, Hans?"
"1 led her home with a rope, and tied her up to the manger to
eat hay, mother."
"That was very stupid of you, Hans. You should have cast
sheep's eyes at her."
"All right, motherl I'll do better next time." Then Hans went into the stable, and taking all the eyes out of the
sheep, he threw them in Gretel's face. Then Gretel was angry, and getting loose, she ran away and became the bride of another.
Hans in Luck
Hans had served his master seven years, and at the end of the seventh year he said, "Master, my time is up; I want to go home and
see my mother, so give me my wages."
"You have served me truly and faithfully," said the master; "as
the service is, so must the wages be," and he gave him a lump of gold as big as his head. Hans pulled his handkerchief out of his
pocket and tied up the lump of gold in it, hoisted it on his shoulder,
and set oflF on his way home. And as he was trudging along, there
came in sight a man riding on a spirited horse, and looking very
gay and lively. "OhI" cried Hans aloud, "how splendid riding must
524 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
be! Sitting as much at one's ease as in an arm-chair, stumbling over
no stones, saving one's shoes, and getting on one hardly knows
howl" The horseman heard Hans say this, and called out to him, "Well
Hans, what are you doing on foot?" "I can't help myself," said
Hans, "I have this great lump to carry; to be sinre, it is gold, but
then I can't hold my head straight for it, and it hurts my shoulder."
"I'll tell you what," said the horseman, "we will change; I will give
you my horse, and you shall give me your lump of gold." "With all
my heart," said Hans; "but I warn you, you will find it heavy." And the horseman got down, took the gold, and, helping Hans up, he
gave the reins into his hand. "When you want to go fast," said he,
"you must click your tongue and cry 'Gee-upl' " And Hans, as he sat upon his horse, was glad at heart, and rode
oflE with merry cheer. After a while he thought he should hke to go
quicker, so he began to cHck with his tongue and to cry "Gee-upl" And the horse began to trot, and Hans was thrown before he knew
what was going to happen, and there he lay in the ditch by the side
of the road. The horse would have got away but that he was caught
by a peasant who was passing that way and driving a cow before
him. And Hans pulled himself together and got upon his feet, feeling very vexed. "Poor work, riding," said he, "especially on a jade like this, who starts off and throws you before you know where you
are, going near to break your neck; never shall I try that game
again; now, your cow is something worth having, one can jog on
comfortably after her and have her milk, butter, and cheese every
day, into the bargain. What would I not give to have such a cowl"
"Well now," said the peasant, "since it will be doing you such a
favor, I don't mind exchanging my cow for your horse." Hans agreed most joyfully, and the peasant, swinging himself
into the saddle, was soon out of sight.
And Hans went along driving his cow quietly before him, and
thinking all the while of the fine bargain he had made.
"With only a piece of bread I shall have everything I can possi- bly want, for I shall always be able to have butter and cheese to it,
and if I am thirsty I have nothing to do but to milk my cow; and
what more is there for heart to wish!" And when he came to an inn he made a halt, and in the joy of his
heart ate up all the food he had brought with him. dinner and supper and all, and bought half a glass of beer with his last two pen- nies. Then on he went again driving his cow, until he should come
to the village where his mother lived. It was now near the middle
Hans in Luck 525
of the day, and the sun grew hotter and hotter, and Hans found
himself on a heath which it would be an hour's journey to cross. And he began to feel very hot, and so thirsty that his tongue clove to the roof of his mouth.
"Never mind," said Hans; "I can find a remedy. I will milk my
cow at once." And tying her to a dry tree, and taking ofiF his leather cap to serve for a pail, he began to milk, but not a drop came. And
as he set to work rather awkwardly, the impatient beast gave him
such a Idck on the head with his hind foot that he fell to the
ground, and for some time could not think where he was; when
lucidly there came by a butcher who was wheeling along a young
pig in a wheelbarrow.
"Here's a fine piece of workl" cried he, helping poor Hans on his legs again. Then Hans related to him all that had happened; and
the butcher handed him his pocket flask, saying, "Here, take a drink, and be a man again; of course the cow would give no milk;
she is old and only fit to draw bmrdens, or to be slaughtered."
"Well, to be sure," said Hans, scratching his head. "Who would have thought it? Of course it is a very handy way of getting meat
when a man has a beast of his own to kill; but for my part I do not
care much about cow beef, it is rather tasteless. Now, if I had but a
young pig, that is much better meat, and then the sausagesl"
"Look here, Hans," said the butcher, "just for love of you I will
exchange, and will give you my pig instead of your cow." "Heaven
reward such kindness I" cried Hans, and handing over the cow, re- ceived in exchange the pig, who was turned out of his wheelbarrow
and was to be led by a string.
So on went Hans, thinking how everything turned out according
to his wishes, and how, if trouble overtook him, all was sure to be
set right directly. After a while he fell in with a peasant, who was
carrying a fine white goose imder his arm. They bid each other
good-day, and Hans began to tell about his luck, and how he had
made so many good exchanges. And the peasant told how he was
taking the goose to a christening feast.
"Just feel how heavy it is," said he, taking it up by the wings; "it has been fattening for the last eight weeks; and when it is roasted,
won't the fat run downl" "Yes, indeed," said Hans, weighing it in
his hand, "very fine to be sure; but my pig is not to be despised." Upon which the peasant glanced cautiously on aU sides, and
shook his head. "I am afraid," said he, "that there is something not quite right about your pig. In the village I have just left one had
actually been stolen from the bailifiPs yard. I fear— I fear you have it
526 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
in your hand; they have sent after the thief, and it would be a bad
look-out for you if it were found upon you; the least that could
happen would be to be thrown into a dark hole."
Poor Hans grew pale with fright. 'Tor heaven's sake," said he,
'Tielp me out of this scrape; I am a stranger in these parts; take my
pig and give me your goose." *lt wiU be running some risk," an- swered the man, Ijut I will do it sooner than that you should come
to grief." And so, taking the cord in his hand, he drove the pig quickly
along a by-path, and lucky Hans went on his way home with the
goose imder his arm. "The more I think of it," said he to himself,
"the better the bargain seems; first I get the roast goose, then the fat; that will last a whole year for bread and dripping; and lastly
the beautiful white feathers which I can stuff my pillow with; how
comfortably I shall sleep upon it, and how pleased my mother will
bel" And when he reached the last village, he saw a knife-grinder with
his barrow; and his wheel went whirring roimd, and he sang,
"My scissors I grind, and my wheel I turn; And all good fellows my trade should learn,
For all that 1 meet with just serves my turn!*
And Hans stood and looked at him; and at last he spoke to him
and said, "You seem very well off, and merry with your grinding."
'*Yes," answered the knife-grinder, "my handiwork pays very weU. I caU a man a good grinder who every time he puts his hand
in his pocket finds money there. But where did you buy that fine
goose?" "I did not buy it, but I exchanged it for my pig," said
Hans. "And the pig?" "That I exchanged for a cow." "And the
cow?" 'That I exchanged for a horse." "And the horse?" "I gave for
the horse a lump of gold as big as my head." "And the gold?" "Oh,
that was my wage for seven years' service."
"You seem to have fended for yourself very well," said the knifegrinder. "Now, if you could but manage to have money in your
pocket every time you put your hand in, your fortune is made."
"How shaU I manage that?" said Hans.
"You must be a knife-grinder Hke me," said the man. "All you want is a grindstone, the rest comes of itself. I have one here; to be
sure it is a Httle damaged, but I don't mind letting you have it in
exchange for your goose; what say you?"
"How can you ask?" answered Hans. "I shall be the luckiest
Clever Else 527
fellow in the world, for if I find money whenever I put my hand in
my pocket, there is nothing more left to want." And so he handed over the goose to the peddler and received
the grindstone in exchange.
"Now," said the knife-grinder, taking up a heavy common stone
that lay near him, "here is another proper sort of stone that will stand a good deal of wear and that you can hammer out your old
nails upon. Take it with you, and carry it carefully." Hans lifted up the stone and carried it off with a contented mind.
*1 must have been bom under a lucky star!" cried he, while his
eyes sparkled for joy. "I have only to wish for a thing and it is
mine." After a while he began to feel rather tired, as indeed he had been
on his legs since daybreak; he also began to feel rather hungry, as
in the fullness of his joy at getting the cow, he had eaten up all he
had. At last he could scarcely go on at all, and had to make a halt
every moment, for the stones weighed him down most immercifully, and he could not help wishing that he did not feel obliged to
drag them along. And on he went at a snail's pace until he came to a well; then he thought he would rest and take a drink of the fresh
water. And he placed the stones carefully by his side at the edge of
the well; then he sat down, and as he stooped to drink, he happened to give the stones a httle push, and they both fell into the
water with a splash. And then Hans, having watched them disappear, jumped for joy, and thanked his stars that he had been so
lucky as to get rid of the stones that had weighed upon him so long
without any effort of his own.
"I really think," cried he, "I am the luckiest man under the sun."
So on he went, void of care, until he reached his mother's house.
Clever Else
There was once a man who had a daughter who was called
"Clever Else," and when she was grown up, her father said she
must be married, and her mother said, "Yes, if we could only find some one that she would consent to have."
At last one came from a distance, and his name was Hans, and
528 GrimrrCs Complete Fairy Tales
when he proposed to her, he made it a condition that Clever Else
should be very careful as well.
"Oh," said the father, "she does not want for brains.'
"No, indeed," said the mother, "she can see the wind coming up
the street and hear the flies cough."
"Well," said Hans, "if she does not turn out to be careful too, I
will not have her." Now when they were all seated at table, and had weU eaten, the
mother said, "Else, go into the ceUar and draw some beer." Then Clever Else took down the jug from the hook in the wall,
and as she was on her way to the cellar she rattled the lid up and
down so as to pass away the time. When she got there, she took a
stool and stood it in front of the cask, so that she need not stoop
and make her back ache with needless trouble. Then she put the
jug under the tap and turned it, and while the beer was running, in
order that her eyes should not be idle, she glanced hither and
thither, and finally caught sight of a pickaxe that the workmen had
left sticking in the ceiling just above her head.
Then Clever Else began to cry, for she thought, "If I marry Hans, and we have a child, and it grows big, and we send it into
the cellar to draw beer, that pickaxe might fall on his head and Idll
him." So there she sat and cried with all her might, lamenting the anticipated misfortune.
All the while they were waiting upstairs for something to drink,
and they waited in vain. At last the mistress said to the maid, "Go
down to the cellar and see why Else does not come." So the maid went, and found her sitting in front of the cask crying with all her might. "What are you crying for?" said the maid.
"Oh dear me," answered she, "how can I help crying? If I marry Hans, and we have a child, and it grows big, and we send it here to
draw beer, perhaps the pickaxe may fall on its head and kill it."
"Om- Else is clever indeed!" said the maid, and directly sat down to bewail the anticipated misfortune.
After a while, when the people upstairs found that the maid did
not return, and they were becoming more and more thirsty, the
master said to the boy, "You go down into the cellar, and see what
Else and the maid are doing." The boy did so, and there he foimd both Clever Else and the
maid sitting crying together. Then he asked what was the matter.
"Oh dear me," said Else, "how can we help crying? If I marry Hans, and we have a child, and it grows big, and we send it here to
draw beer, the pickaxe might faU on its head and kill it." "Our Else
Clever Else 529
is clever indeed!" said the boy, and sitting down beside her, he began howling with a good will.
Upstairs they were all waiting for him to come back, but as he
did not come, the master said to the mistress, "TTou go down to the
cellar and see what Else is doing." So the mistress went down and found all three in great lamentations, and when she asked the cause, then Else told her how the future possible child might be killed as soon as it was big enough to
be sent to draw beer, by the pickaxe falling on it. Then the mother
at once exclaimed, "Our Else is clever indeedl" and, sitting down, she wept with the rest.
Upstairs the husband waited a little while, but as his wife did not
return, and as his thirst constantly increased, he said, 1 must go
down to the cellar myself, and see what has become of Else." And when he came into the cellar, and foimd them all sitting and
weeping together, he was told that it was all owing to the child that
Else might possibly have, and the possibility of its being killed by
the pickaxe so happening to fall just at the time the child might be
sitting underneath it drawing beer; and when he heard all this, he
cried, "How clever is our Ekel" and sitting down, he joined his tears to theirs.
The intended bridegroom stayed upstairs by himself a long time,
but as nobody came back to him, he thought he would go himself
and see what they were aU about. And there he found all five
lamenting and crying most pitifully, each one louder than the other.
"What misfortime has happened?" cried he.
"O my dear Hans," said Else, "if we marry and have a child, and it grows big, and we send it down here to draw beer, perhaps that
pickaxe which has been left sticking up there might fall down on
the child's head and kill it; and how can we help crying at that!"
"Now," said Hans, "I cannot think that greater sense than that could be wanted in my household; so as you are so clever, Else, I
will have you for my wife," and taking her by the hand he led her upstairs, and they had the wedding at once.
A little while after they were married, Hans said to his wife, "I am going out to work, in order to get money; you go into the field
and cut the com, so that we may have bread." "Very well, I wiU do
so, dear Hans," said she. And after Hans was gone she cooked herself some nice stew, and
took it with her into the field. And when she got there, she said to
herself, "Now, what shall I do? Shall I reap first, or eat first? All
right, I will eat first." Then she ate her fill of stew, and when she
530 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
could eat no more, she said to herself, "Now, what shall I do? Shall
I reap first, or sleep first? All right, I wiU sleep first." Then she lay down in the com and went to sleep.
And Hans got home, and waited there a long while, and Else did
not come, so he said to himself, "My Clever Else is so industrious
that she never thinks of coming home and eating." But when evening drew near and still she did not come, Hans set
out to see how much com she had cut; but she had cut no com at
all, but there she was lying in it asleep. Then Hans made haste
home, and fetched a bird-net with little bells and threw it over her;
and stiU she went on sleeping. And he ran home again and locked
himself in, and sat him down on his bench to work.
At last, when it was beginning to grow dark, Clever Else woke,
and when she got up and shook herself, the beUs jingled at each
movement that she made. Then she grew frightened, and began to
doubt whether she were reaUy Clever Else or not, and said to herself, "Am I, or am I not?" And, not knovidng what answer to make,
she stood for a long while considering; at last she thought, "1 will
go home to Hans and ask him if I am or not; he is sure to know." So she ran up to the door of her house, but it was locked; then
she knocked at the vidndow, and cried, "Hans, is Else within?"
"Yes," answered Hans, "she is in."
Then she was in a greater fright than ever, and crying, "Oh dear,
then I am not I," she went to inquire at another door, but the peo- ple hearing the jingling of the bells would not open to her, and she
could get in nowhere. So she ran away beyond the village, and since then no one has seen her.
Hans Married
Thebe was once a young country chap called Hans, whose Uncle
wanted very much to marry him to a rich wife, so he set him beside
the oven and let a good fire be lighted. Then he fetched a jug of
milk and a large piece of white bread, and gave Hans a shining
newly-coined penny, saying, "Hans, keep this penny safely, and break your white bread into this milk; and mind you stop here, and
do not stir from your stool till I return."
Hans Married 531
Tes," said Hans, *1 will faithfully do all you require." Then the Uncle went and drew on a pair of old spotted breeches,
and, walking to the next village, called on a rich farmer's daughter, and asked her whether she would marry his nephew Hans, assuring
her that he was a prudent and clever young man, who could not
fail to please her. The girl's covetous father, however, asked, "How is he situated with regard to property? Has he the wherevvdthal to
live?"
**My dear friend," said the Uncle, "my nephew is a warm youth, and has not only a nice penny in hand, but plenty to eat and drink.
He can count too, quite as many specks" (meaning money) "as I"; and as he spoke, he slapped his hand upon his spotted breeches.
"Will you," he continued, "take the trouble to go with me, and in
an hour's time you shall see everything as I have said?" The oflFer appeared so advantageous to the covetous farmer that
he would not let it slip, and therefore said, "If it is so, I have nothing more to say against the wedding." So the ceremony was performed on an appointed day, and afterwards the yoimg vnfe wished to go into the fields and view the
property of her husband. Hans drew his spotted smock first over his
Sunday clothes, saying to his bride, "I do not wish to spoil my best
things!" This done, they went together into the fields, and wherever a vine-stock was planted on the road, or the meadows and fields
divided, Hans pointed with his finger there, and then laid it on one
great spot or another on his smock, and said, "This spot is mine and
thine too, my dearl I>o just look at it." Hans meant by this, not that his wife should gaze at the broad fields, but that she should look at
his smock, which was reaUy his ownl
'T)id you then go to the wedding?" "Yesl I was there in full tog- gery. My head-piece was of snow, and there came the sun and
melted it; my clothes were of worsted, and I walked through
thorns, so that they were torn off; my shoes were of glass, and I
stepped upon a stone, and they cracked and feU to pieces."
The Youth Who Could Not Shiver
and Shake
A FATHER had two sons. The elder was smart and could do anything. But the younger was so stupid that he could neither learn
nor understand a thing, and people would say, "What a biurden
that stupid boy must be to his father." Whatever the father wanted done, Jack, the elder boy, was
obUged to do, even to take messages, for his brother was too stupid
to understand or remember. But Jack was a terrible coward, and if
his father wished him to go anywhere late in the evening, and the
road led through the churchyard, he would say, "Oh, no, father, I
can't go there, it makes me bemble and shake so." Sometimes when they sat round the fire in the evening, while
someone told stories that frightened him, he would say, "Please
don't go on, it makes me shake all over." The younger boy, seated in his comer among the Hsteners, would
open his eyes quite wide and say, 'T can't think what he means by saying it makes him shiver and shake. It must be something very
wonderful that could make me shiver and shake." At last one day the father spoke to his younger son very plainly
and said, 'Xisten, you there in the comer; you are growing tall and strong, you must learn very soon to earn your own living. See how
your brother works, while you do nothing but run and jump about
aU day."
"Well, father," he replied, "I am quite ready to earn my own liv- ing when you like, if I may only learn to shiver and shake, for I
don't know how to do that at all."
His brother laughed at this speech, and said to himself, "What a simpleton my brother isl He will have to sweep the streets by and
by or else starve."
His father sighed and said, "You will never get your living by
that, boy, but you will soon learn to shiver and shake, no doubt." Just at this moment the sexton of the church came in, and the father related the trouble he was in about his younger son who was
so silly and unable to learn. "What do you think he said to me
when I told him he must learn to eam his own living?" asked the
father. "Something silly, I suppose," answered the sexton. "Silly, in-
The Youth Who Could Not Shiver and Shake 533
deed! he said he wished he could learn to shiver and shake." "Oh!"
cried the sexton, "let him come to me, I'll soon manage that for
him; he won't be long learning to shiver and shake if I have him
with me.'' The father was delighted with this proposal; it was really a good
beginning for his stupid son. So the sexton took the youth in hand
at once, led him to the church tower, and made him help ring the
bells. For the first two days he Hked it very well, but on the third at
midnight the sexton roused him out of his sleep to toll the passing
bell; he had to mount to the highest part of the church tower. "You
will soon learn what it is to shiver and shake now, young man," thought the sexton, but he did not go home, as we shall hear later on.
The youth walked through the churchyard and mounted the
steps to the belfry without feeling the least fear, but just as he
reached the bell rope, he saw a figure in white standing on the
steps. "Who's there?" he cried. But the figiu-e neither moved nor
spoke. "Answer me," he said, "or take yourself off; you have no business here." But the sexton, who had disguised himself to frighten the boy,
remained immovable, for he wished to be taken for a ghost, but
Hans was not to be frightened. He exclaimed, for the second time,
"What do you want here? Speak, if you are an honest man, or I will
throw you down the steps." The sexton, thinking he could not intend to do anything so
dreadful, answered not a word, but stood still, as if he were made
of stone. "Once more, I ask you what you want," said Hans; and as there was still no answer, he sprung upon the sham ghost, and giv- ing him a push, he rolled down ten steps, and falhng into a corner, there remained.
Thereupon Hans went back to the bell, tolled it for the proper
number of minutes, then went home, laid himself down without
saying a word, and went fast asleep.
The sexton's wife waited a long time for her husband, and finding he did not come home she became alarmed, and going to
Hans, woke him and said, "Do you know why my husband is staying out so late— he was with you in the tower I suppose?"
"There was someone dressed in white standing on the top of the steps when I went into the belfry, and as he would not answer a
word when I spoke to him, I took him for a thief and kicked him
downstairs. We will go and see who it is; if it should be your husband I shall be sorry, but of course I did not know."
534 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
The wife ran out to the tower and found her husband lying in a
comer groaning, for he had broken his leg. Then she went to the father of Hans with a loud outcry against the boy. "Your son," cried
she, "has brought bad luck to the house; he has thrown my husband down the steps and broken his leg; he shan't stay with us any
longer, send for him home." Then the father was terribly vexed, sent for his son, and scolded
him. "What do you mean, you wretched boy," he said, "by these
wicked tricks?" "Father," answered the boy, "hear what I have to say. I never meant to do wrong, but when I saw a white figure
standing there in the night, of course I thought it was there for
some bad piurpose. I did not know it was the sexton, and I warned
him three times what I would do, if he did not answer."
"Ahl yes, you are the plague of my Hfe," said his father. "Now
get out of my sight, and never let me see you again." "Yes, father, I will go right willingly tomorrow, and then if I learn to shiver and
shake, I shall acquire knowledge that will enable me to earn my Hving at all events."
'Xeam what you like," said his father, "it's all the same to me. There are fifty dollars, take them and go out into the world when
you please; but don't tell any one where you come from, or who is
your father, for I am ashamed to own you." "Father," said Hans, 'T
will do just as you tell me; yoiu* orders are very easy to perform." At daybreak the next morning, the youth put the fifty doUars into
his pocket, and went out into the highroad, saying to himself as he
walked on, "When shall I learn to shiver and shake— when shall I
learn to be afraid?" Presently a man met him on the road, overheard what he said,
and saw at once that the young man was fearless. He quickly joined
him, and they walked a little way together till they came to a spot
where they could see a gaUows.
"Look," he said, "there is a tree where seven men have been
married with the ropemaker's daughter, and have learned how to swing; if you only sit down here and watch them till night comes
on, ril answer for it you will shiver and shake before morning." "I
never had a better opportunity," answered the youth. "That is very easily done. You come to me again early tomorrow morning, and if
it teaches me to shiver and shake, you shall have my fifty dollars." Then the young man went and seated himself imder the gallows
and waited till the evening, and feeling cold he Hghted a fire; but at
midnight the wind rose and blew so fiercely and chiU, that even a
large fire could not warm him.
The Youth Who Could Not Shiver and Shake 535
The high cold wind made the bodies of the murderers swing to
and fro, and he thought to himself, if I am so cold down here by
the fire, they must be frozen up there; and after pitying them for
some time he climbed up, imtied the ropes and brought down all
the seven bodies, stirred the fire into a blaze, and seated them
round it so close, that their clothes caught fire. Finding they did not
move, he said to them, "Sit farther back, will you, or I vwll hang
you up again." But the dead could not hear him, they only sat silent and let their rags bum.
Then Hans became angry, and said, *Tf you wiU not move, there
is no help for it; I must not let you biun, I must hang you up." So he hung the seven bodies up again all in a row, then laid himself
down by the fire and fell fast asleep.
In the morning the man came, according to his promise, hoping
to get the fifty dollars. 'Well, I suppose you know now what it is to shiver and shake?" he said.
"No, indeed," he replied. "Why should I? Those men up there have not opened their mouths once; and when I seated them round
the fire, they allowed their old rags to bum vvdthout moving, and if
I had not hung the bodies up again, they would have been burned
also." The man looked quite scared when he heard this, and went away without attempting to ask for the fifty dollars.
Then Hans continued his journey, and again said aloud to himself, "1 wonder what this shivering and shaking can be." A wagoner walking along the road by his horses overtook him,
and asked who he was. "1 don't know," he replied. The wagoner
asked again, "Why are you here?" "I can't teU," said Hans. "Who is
yomr father?" "I dare not say." "What were you grumbling about
just now, when I came up with you?" "1 want to learn to shiver and
shake," said Hans.
"Don't talk nonsense," said the wagoner. "Come with me, I wiU show you a little of the world, and find you something to do better
than that"
So the young man went with the wagoner, and about evening
they arrived at an inn, where they put up for the night. No sooner,
however, did Hans enter the room than he muttered to himself,
"Oh! if I could only learn to shiver and shake." The landlord heard
him, and said with a laugh, "If that is all you wish to learn, I can
tell you of a splendid opportunity in this part of the world."
"Ah! be silent now," said the landlady. "You know how many people have already lost their fives through their curiosity. It would
536 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
be a pity for a nice yoiing man like this, with such fine blue eyes,
never to see daylight again."
But Hans spoke for himself at once. "If it is so bad as you say,"
he cried, "I should like to try as soon as possible; all I want is to
learn how to shiver and shake, so tell me what I am to do." And the youth gave the landlord no rest till he had explained the matter to him.
"Well," he said at last, "not far from here stands an enchanted castle, where you could easily learn to shiver and shake, if you
remain in it. The King of the country has promised to give his
daughter in marriage to any one who will ventiure to sleep in the
castle for three nights, and she is as beautiful a young lady as the
sun ever shone upon. Rich and valuable treasures in the castle are
watched over by wicked spirits, and any one who could destroy
these goblins and demons, and set free the treasures which are rotting in the castle, would be made a rich and lucky man. Lots of
people have gone into the castle full of hope that they should succeed, but they have not been heard of since." Hans was not in the least alarmed by this account, and the next
morning he started off early to visit the King.
When he was admitted to the palace the King looked at him
earnestly, and seemed much pleased with his appearance; then he
said, "Do you really wish to be allowed to remain for three nights
in the enchanted castle?" "Yes," repHed Hans, "I do request it."
"You can take no living creature with you," said the King; "what
else will you have?" "I only ask for a fire, a turning lathe, a cutting
board, and a knife," he replied. To this the King readily agreed, and these articles Hans was permitted to take into the castle during the day. When night came, he
took up his abode in one of the rooms, hghted a fire which soon
burned brightly, placed the turning lathe and the cutting board
near it, and sat down on the cutting board, determined to make
himself comfortable. Presently he exclaimed, "Oh, when shall I learn to shiver and shake? Not here, I am certain, for I am feeHng
too comfortable." But at midnight, just as he had stirred the fire into a blaze, he
suddenly heard in a comer the cry of a cat: "Miou, miou; how
cold it isl" "What a fool you must be, then," cried Hans, "to stay out there in the cold; come and seat yourself by the fire, and get
warm if you will." As he spoke, two very large black cats sprang forward furiously,
seated themselves on each side of the fire, and stared at him with
The Youth Who Could Not Shiver and Shake 537
wild, fiery eyes. After a while, when the cats became thoroughly
warm, they spoke, and said, "Comrade, will you have a game of
cards?" "With all my heart," answered Hans; "but first stretch out
your feet, and let me examine your claws."
The cats stretched out their paws. "Ah!" said he, "what long nails you have, and now that I have seen your fingers, I would
rather be excused from playing cards with you." Then he killed them both, and threw them out of the wdndow
into the moat. As soon as he had settled these two intruders, he
seated himself again by the fire, hoping to have a little rest; but in a
few moments there rushed out from every comer of the room black
cats and black dogs with fiery chains one after another, till there
seemed no end to them. They mewed, and barked, and growled,
and at length jumped on bis fire and scattered it about the room, as
if they wished to put it out.
For a while he watched them in silence, till at last he got angry,
and seizing his cutting board, exclaimed, "Be oflFI you horrid creatures!" and then rushing after them, he chased them round the room. Some few escaped in the clamor, but the rest he killed with
his cutting-knife, and threw into the moat.
As soon as he had cleared the room, he rekindled his fire, by
gathering the sparks together, and sat down to warm himself in the
blaze. After a time he began to feel so sleepy that his eyes would
not keep open any longer; so he looked round the room, and espied
in a comer a large bed. "That is the very place for me," he said, ris- ing, and laying himself upon it; but just as he was closing his eyes
to sleep, the bed began to move about the room, and at last increased its speed, and went off at a gallop through the castle.
"All right," cried Hans, "now, go on again." At this the bed started off, as if six horses were harnessed to it, through the doorway, down the steps, to the great gates of the castle, against which
it came vnth a great bump, and tumbled, legs uppermost, throwing
all the pillows and blankets on Hon*: who lav undprneath, a<? if a
mountain were upon him. He struggled out from the load, and said,
"Anyone may travel in that fashion who likes, but I don't." So he laid himself down again by the fire, and slept till the daybreak.
In the morning the King came to the castle, and, as he caught
sight of Hans lying by the fire asleep, he thought the evil spirits
had IdUed him, and that he was dead. "Alasl" said the King, "I am very sorry; it is a great pity that such a fine youth should lose his
life in this manner." But Hans, who heard, sprang up in a moment and exclaimed,
538 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
"No, King, I am not dead yet." The King, quite astonished and joy- ful at finding him unhurt, asked him how he had passed the night.
"Oh, very pleasantly indeed," repUed Hans; and then he related to the King all that had passed, which amused him very much.
On returning to the inn, the landlord stared at him with wide
open eyes: "I never expected to see you again alive; but I suppose
you have learned to shiver and shake by this time." "Not I," he
replied; "I believe it is useless for me to try, for I never shall learn
to be afraid." The second night came, and he again went up to the old castle,
and seated himself by the fire, singing the burden of his old song,
"When shall I learn to shiver and shake?"
At midnight he heard a noise, as of something falling. It came
nearer; then for a little while all was quiet; at last, with a tremendous scream, half the body of a man came tumbling down the
chimney, and fell right in front of Hans.
"Holloa!" he cried, "all that noise, and only half a man; where's
the other half?" At this, the noise and tumult began again, and, amid yeUings and howHngs, the other half of the man fell on the hearth.
"Wait," said Hans, rising; "1 will stir the fire into a blaze first." But when he turned to sit down again, he found that the two halves
of the man had joined, and there sat an ugly-looldng object in his
place. "Stay," cried the young man. "I did not bargain for this; that
seat is mine." The ugly man tried to push Hans away; but he was too quick for
him, and putting out all his strength, he dislodged the creatiure
from his seat, and placed himself again upon it.
Immediately there came tumbling down the chimney nine more
of these horrid men, one after the other; each of them held a
himian thigh-bone in his hand, and the first who appeared brought
out two skulls, and presently they set up the nine bones Hke skittles,
and began to play, with the skulls for balls.
"Shall I play with you?" asked Hans, after he had looked on for
some time. "Yes, wilfingly," they replied, "if you have any money."
"Plenty," he said. "But your balls are not quite roimd." So he took
the skuUs and turned them on his lathe. "Now they will roll better;
come on, let us set to work." The strange men played with great spirit, and won a few of his
dollars; but all at once the cock crowed, and they vanished from
his eyes. After they were gone he laid himself down and slept
The Youth Who Could Not Shiver and Shake 539
peacefully till the King arrived, and asked him what had happened,
and how it had fared with him during the night.
"Well," said Hans, "I played a game of skittles with some horrid- looking fellows who had bones and skulls for skittles and balls. I
won sometimes, and I lost a couple of dollars." "Did you not shiver
and shake?" asked the King, in siirprise. "Not I, indeedl I wish I
couldl Oh, if I only knew how to shiver and shake." The third night came, and found our hero once more seated on
his bench by the fire, and saying quite mournfully, "When shall I ever learn to shiver and shake?" As he spoke there came into the room six tall men, bearing a
coffin containing a dead man. "Ahl" said Hans, "I know what you have there, it is the body of my cousin. He has been dead two
days." Then he beckoned with his finger and said, "Come here, little cousin, I should like to see youl" The men placed the coffin on the ground before him, and took off
the hd. Hans touched the face, and it felt as cold as ice. "Wait," he
said, 'T will soon warm it!" so he went to the fire, and warming his hand, laid it on the face of the dead man, which remained as cold as ever.
At last he took him out of the coffin, carried him to the fire, and
placed him on his lap, while he rubbed the hands and chest that he
might cause the blood to circulate, but all to no piupose; the body
remained as cold as before. Presently he remembered that when
two lie in bed together they warm each other, so he placed the
dead man in bed, covered him over, and lay down beside him.
After a while this seemed to produce warmth in the body, the
blood began to circulate, and at last the dead man moved and
spoke.
"There, now, dear cousin," said Hans, "see, I have warmed you
into Hfe again, as I said I could." But the dead man sprang up and
cried, "Yes, and now I will strangle you."
"Whatl" cried Hans, "is that your gratitude? You may as well go
back into your coffin again." He leaped out of bed as he spoke, and, seizing the body, he threw it into the coffin and shut the lid down
closely upon it. Then the six tall men walked in, lifted up the coffin
and carried it away.
"That's over," said Hans. "Ohl I am sure nothing will ever teach
me to shiver and shake." As he spoke a man walked in who was taller and larger than any
of the others, and the look of his eyes was frightful; he was old, and
wore a long white beard.
540 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
"You wretched creature," cried the man, "I will soon teach you
what it is to shiver and shake, for you shall die." "Not so fast,
friend," answered Hans. "You cannot kill me without my own consent." "I will soon have you on the ground," repHed the monster.
"Softly, softly, do not boast; you may be strong, but you will find
that I am stronger than you." "That is to be proved," said the old
man. 'If you are stronger than I am, I wiU let you go. Come, we
will try." The old man, followed by Hans, led the way through long dark
passages and cellars, till they saw the reflection of a smith's fire, and presently came to a forge. Then the old man took an axe, and with
one blow cut through the anvil right down to the ground.
"I can do better than that," said Hans, taking up the axe and going towards another anvil. The monster was so surprised at this
daring on the part of Hans that he followed him closely, and as he
leaned over to watch what the youth was going to do, his long white beard fell on the anvil.
Hans raised his axe, spHt the anvil at one blow, wedging the old
man's beard in the opening at the same time.
"Now I have got you, old feUow," cried Hans, "prepare for the
death you deserve." Then he took up an iron bar and beat the old man till he cried for mercy, and promised to give him all the riches that were hidden in the castle.
At this Hans drew out the axe from the anvil, and set the old
man's beard free, while he watched him closely. He kept his word, however, and leading the young man back to the castle, pointed out to him a cellar in which were three immense chests fuU of
gold. "There is one for the poor," said he; "another for the King, and
the third for yourself." Hans was about to thank him, when the cock crowed, and the old
man vanished, leaving the youth standing in the dark.
*1 must find my way out of this place," he said, after groping about for some time, but at last daylight penetrated into the vaults,
and he succeeded in reaching his old room, and lying down by the
fire, slept soundly till he was aroused by the King's arrival.
"Well," he said, in a glad voice when he saw the young man
alive, "have you learned to shiver and shake yet?" "Nol" replied
Hans, "what was there to make me fear? My dead cousin came to see me, and a bearded old man tried to conquer me, but I managed
him, and he has shown me where to find hidden treasures of gold,
and how could I shiver and shake at these visitors?"
"Then," said the King, "you have released the castle from en-
Fred and Kate 541
chantment. I will give you, as I promised, my daughter in marriage." "That is good news," cried Hans. "But I have not learned to
shiver and shake after all." The gold was soon after brought aWay from the castle, and the
marriage celebrated with great pomp. Young Prince Hans, as he
was now called, did not seem quite happy after all. Not even the
love of his bride could satisfy him. He was always saying: "When shall I learn to shiver and shake?"
This troubled the Princess very much, tiU her lady's-maid said, "I will help you in this matter; I will show you how to make the
Prince shiver and shake, that you may depend upon." So the Princess agreed to do what the lady's-maid advised. First she went out to a brook that flowed through the gardens of
the palace, and brought in a whole pailful of water, containing tiny
fish, which she placed in the room.
"Remember," said the lady's-maid, "when the Prince is asleep in bed, you must throw this pail of water over him; that will make
him shiver and shake, I am quite certain, and then he will be contented and happy." So that night while Hans was in bed and asleep, the Princess
drew down the bedclothes gently, and threw the cold water with the
gudgeons aU over him. The httle fish wriggled about as they fell
on the bed, and the Prince, waking suddenly, exclaimed, "Oh! dear,
how I do shiver and shake, what can it be?" Then seeing the Prin- cess standing by his bed, he guessed what she had done.
"Dear wife," he said, "now I am satisfied, you have taught me to
shiver and shake at last," and from that hour he lived happily and contented with his wife, for he had learned to shiver and shake- but not to fear.
Fred and Kate
There were once a yoimg husband and wife, and their names were
Fred and Kate. One day said Fred, "I must go now to my work in the fields, Kate, and when I come back you must have on the table
some roast meat to satisfy my hunger, and some cool drink to
542 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
quench my thirst." "All right, Fred," answered Kate; "be off with
you, I will see to it." When dinner-time began to draw near, she took down a sausage
from the chimney, put it in a frying-pan with some butter, and
stood it over the fire. The sausage began to frizzle and fry, and
Kate stood holding the handle of the pan, and fell into deep
thought. At last she said to herself, "While the sausage is cooking I
might as well be drawing the beer in the cellar." So she saw that the frying-pan was standing firmly, and then took a can and went down into the cellar to draw the beer. Now, while
Kate was watching the beer run into the can, a sudden thought came into her mind.
"HoUoal the dog is not fastened up; he may perhaps get at the
sausage," and in a trice she was up the cellar steps: but already the dog had it in his mouth, and was making off with it. Then Kate,
with all haste, followed after him and chased him a good way into
the fields, but the dog was quicker than Kate, and, never letting slip
the sausage, was soon at a great distance. "Well, it can't be
helped!" said Kate turning back, and as she had tired herself with running, she took her time about going home, and walked slowly to cool herself.
All this time the beer was running out of the cask, for Kate had
not turned off the tap, and as the can was soon full, it began to run
over on the cellar floor, and ran, and ran, until the cask was empty.
Kate stood on the steps and saw the misfortune. "Dear me!" cried
she, "what am I to do to prevent Fred from noticing it!" She considered for a while, and then remembered that there was
remaining in the loft from the last fair time a sack of fine wheatflour; she determined to bring it down, and strew it over the beer.
"To be sure," said she, "those who know how to save have somewhat in time of necessity." And going up to the loft, she dragged the sack down and threw it
right upon the can full of beer, so that Fred's drink ran about the
cellar with the rest. "It is all right," said Kate; "where some goes
the rest must follow," and she strewed the meal all over the cellar. When all was done, she was highly pleased, and thought how clean and neat it looked.
At dirmer-time home came Fred. "Now, wife, what have you got
for me?" said he.
"O Fred," answered she, "I was going to cook a sausage for you, but while I was drawing the beer the dog got it out of the pan, and
while I was miming after the dog the beer all ran away, and as I
Fred and Kate 543
was going to stop up the beer with the wheat-meal I knocked over
the can: but it is all right now; the cellar is quite dry again."
But said Fred, "O Kate, Kate! what have you been about, letting the sausage be carried off, and the beer run out of the cask, and
then to waste all our good meal into the bargain?" "Well, Fred, I
did not know; you should have told me," said Kate.
So the husband thought to himself, "If my v^dfe is Hke this, I
must look after things a little better." Now he had saved a very pretty sum of money, and he changed
it all to gold, and said to Kate, "Do you see these yellow counters?
I am going to make a hole in the stable underneath the cows' man- ger and bury them; see that you do not meddle v^th them, or it will
be the worse for you." And she said, "Oh no, Fred, certainly I
won't." Now, one day when Fred was away, there came some peddlers to
the village, with earthen pots and basins to sell, and they asked the
young wife if she had nothing to give in exchange for them.
"O my good men," said Kate, "I have no money to buy anything with, but if you had any use for yellow counters, I might do some
business with you." "Yellow counters! why not? We might as well
see them," said they. "Then go into the stable and dig under the
cows' manger, and you will find them; but I dare not go near the
place." So those rogues went and dug, and foimd the gold accordingly.
And they seized it quickly, and ran off with it, leaving the pots and
pans behind them in the house. Kate thought she must make some
use of her new possessions, so, as she had no need of them in
the kitchen, she spread them out on the ground, and then stuck
them, one after another, for ornament, on the fence which ran round the house.
When Fred came home and saw the new decorations, he said,
"Kate, what have you been doing?" "I bought them every one, Fred, with those yellow counters that were buried under the manger, and I did not go there myself; the peddlers had to dig them up
for themselves."
"O v^dfel" cried Fred, "what have you done? They were not counters, but pure gold, and all our capital; you should not have
done so." "Well, Fred, I did not know; you should have told me
that before," answered Kate. Then Kate stood still a Httle while to consider, and at last she
said, "Listen, Fred, we may be able to get the gold back again. Let
us run after the thieves." "Very well," said Fred, "we will try; only
544 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
let us take some bread and cheese with us, that we may have something to eat on the way." "All right," she answered. So they set out, and as Fred was a better walker than Kate, she
was soon left behind. "All the better for me," said she, "for when
we turn back I shall have so much the less distance to go." And they came to a mountain where on both sides of the road
there were deep cart-ruts. And Kate said to herself, "How sad to see the poor earth torn, and vexed, and oppressed in this wayl It
will never be healed again in all its Kfe." And with a compassionate heart, she took out her butter and
smeared the cart-ruts right and left, so that they might not be so
cut by the wheels; and as she was stooping to perform this merciful
act a cheese fell out of her pocket and rolled down the mountain.
And Kate said, "I have walked over the ground once, and I am not going to do it again, but another shall rim after that cheese, and
bring it back." So saying, she took another cheese, and rolled it after the first one; and as it did not seem to be coming back again,
she sent a third racing after them, thinking, "Perhaps they are waiting for company, and are not used to traveling alone."
But when they all three delayed coming, she said, "I can't think what this means 1 Perhaps it is that the third one has lost his way, so
I will send a fourth that he may call out to him as he goes by." But it went no better with the fourth than with the third. And Kate lost
all patience and threw down the fifth and sixth, and that was all.
A long while she stood and waited for them to come up, but as
still they did not come, she said, "Oh, it's like sending good money after bad; there is no getting you back again. If you suppose I am
going to wait for you any longer, you are very much mistaken: I
shall go on my way and you may overtake me; your legs are
younger than mine." Kate then went on until she overtook Fred, who was standing stiU and waiting, as he wanted something to eat.
"Now, be quick," he said, "and hand over what you have
brought." And she handed him the dry bread. "Now for the butter
and the cheese," said the man.
"O Fred," said Kate, "1 anointed the cart-ruts with the butter, and the cheeses will soon be here, they are upon the road; one of
them ran away, and I sent the others to fetch it back."
Then said Fred, "It was very wrong of you, Kate, to waste the
butter, and roll the cheeses down the hill." And Kate answered,
"Well then, you should have told me so."
As they were eating the dry bread together, Fred said, "Kate, did
Fred and Kate 545
you lock up tbe house before leaving?" "No, Fred; you ought to have told me that before."
And her husband answered, "Well, you must go home at once and lock up the house before we go any farther, and you might as
well bring something more to eat with you, and I will wait for you
here." So Kate went, and she thought to herself, "As Fred wants some- thing more to eat, and he does not care much about butter and
cheese, I will bring some dried apples and a jug of vinegar back
with me." Then she bolted the front door, but the back door she took oflE its
hinges, and lifted it on her shoulders, thinking that if she had the door all safe no harm could come to the house. And she took her
time on the way back, and thought to herself, 'Tred will have so
much the longer to rest." So when she got back to him, she called
out, "Fred, if the house-door is safe, no harm can come to the
house I"
"Oh dear!" cried he, "what a prudent wife have II To carry away the back-door, so that any one may get in, and to bolt the front
door! It is too late now to go home, but as you have brought the
door so far, you may carry it on farther."
"All right, I will carry the door, Fred," said she, "but the dried apples and the vinegar will be too heavy for me; I will hang them
on the door and make it carry them." Now they went into the wood to look for the thieves, but they
could not find them. When it grew dark they got up into a tree to
pass the night there. No sooner had they settled down when up
came the peddlers, some of those fellows who carry away what
should not go with them, and who find things before they are lost.
They laid themselves down directly under the tree where Fred and
Kate were, and they made a fire, and began to divide their spoil.
Then Fred got down on the farther side of the tree and gathered
together some stones, and then got up again, intending to stone the
robbers to death with them. The stones, however, did not hit them,
and they said, "It will soon be morning; the wind is rising and
shaking down the fir-cones." Now all the time Kate had the door on her shoulder, and as it
weighed upon her heavily, she thought it must be the dried apples,
and she said, "Fred, I must throw down the dried apples." "No,
Kate, not now," answered he; "we might be discovered." "Oh dear,
Fred, but I must! They weigh me down sol" said she. "Well then,
do it, if you must, in the name of all that's tormentingl" cried he.
546 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
And down rolled the apples between the boughs; and the robbers
cried, "There are birds in this treel" After a while, as the door still weighed her down heavily, Kate
said, "O Fred, I must pour away the vinegar"; and he answered,
"No, Kate, you must not do that; we might be discovered." "Oh
dear me, Fred, but I must! it weighs me dowoi sol" "Then do it, if
you must, in the name of all that's tormentingl" And she poured out the vinegar, so that the men were all besprinkled. And they said one to another, "The morning dew is beginning to fall aheady." At last Kate began to think that it must really be the door that
weighed so heavy, and she said, "Fred, I must throw down the
door"; and he answered, "No, Kate, not now; we might be discovered." "Oh dear me, Fred, but I musti It weighs me down so." "No,
Kate, you must hold it fast." "O Fred, it's slipping, it's falling!"
"Well then, let it fall in the name of tormentl" cried Fred in a pas- sion.
And so it fell with a great crash, and the thieves below cried,
"There is something vvrong about this treel" and they got up in a great hurry and ran off, leaving their spoil behind them. And early
in the morning when Fred and Kate came down from the tree they
got all their gold again and carried it home.
And when they reached their house again Fred said, "Now, Kate,
you must fall to and be very industrious and work hard." "All right,
Fred, I will go into the field and cut com," said she.
And when she came into the field she said to herself, "Shall I eat
before I cut, or shall I sleep before I cut? Well, I will eat first." And so she ate, and after that she felt sleepy, but she began to cut and
went on half asleep cutting her own clothes, skirts, gown, and all,
and when she at last woke up and found herself in rags, she said to
herself, "Is this really I or not? Oh dear, it is not 11" After a while night came on, and Kate ran into the village and
knocked at her husband's door calling out, 'Tredl" "What is it?"
said he. "I want to know if Kate is at home," said she. "Oh yes," he
answered, "she is lying here fast asleep."
So she said to herself, "All right then, I am certainly at home," and she ran on farther.
Soon she came upon some thieves who were looking about for
something to steal, and she went up to them and offered to help
them, and the thieves thought she knew of a good place and opportunity, and were glad of her offer. But Kate walked in front of the
houses calling out, "Good people, what have you for us to steal?"
Wise Folks 547
So the thieves thought to themselves, "This will never do," and
wished themselves quit of her. At last they said to her, "Just at the
end of the village there are some turnips in the parson's field; go and fetch us some." So Kate went into the field and began to pull some up, but very
lazily, and never raised herself. Presently came by a man who saw
her, and thought she was some evil thing grubbing for the tin-nips.
So he ran quickly into the village and said to the parson, "O parson, some evil creature is grubbing in your tumip-fieldl"
"Oh dearl" answered the parson, "I have a lame foot, I cannot go
to drive it away." And the man at once offered to take him on his back, and he did so.
Just as they reached the field Kate got up and stood upright.
"Oh, the devil!" cried the parson, and both took to their heels, and the parson was able, out of his great fear, to run faster with his lame foot than the man who had carried him on his back with both
legs sound.
Wise Folks
One day a peasant took his good hazel-stick out of the comer and
said to his wife, "Trina, I am going across country, and shall not re- turn for three days. If during that time the cattle-dealer should
happen to call and want to buy oui three cows, you may strike a
bargain at once, but not unless you can get two hundred thalers for
them; nothing less, do you hear?" "For heaven's sake just go in
peace," answered the woman, "I will manage that." "You, indeed,"
said the man. "You once fell on your head when you were a little child, and that affects you even now; but let me tell you this, if you
do anything fooHsh, I will make your back black and blue, and not
with paint, I assure you, but with the stick which I have in my
hand, and the coloring shall last a whole year, you may rely on
that." And having said that, the man went on his way. Next morning the cattle-dealer came, and the woman had no need to say many words to him. When he had seen the cows and
heard the price, he said, "I am quite willing to give that; honesftly speaking, they are worth it. I will take the beasts away with me at
once." He unfastened their chains and drove them out of the byre,
548 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
but just as he was going out of the yard-door, the woman clutched
him by the sleeve and said, "You must give me the two hundred
thalers now, or I cannot let the cows go." "True," answered the
man, "but I have forgotten to buckle on my money-belt. Have no fear, however, you shall have security for my paying. I will take
two cows with me and leave one, and then you will have a good
pledge." The woman saw the force of this, and let the man go away
with the cows, and thought to herself, "How pleased Hans will be
when he finds how cleverly I have managed it!" The peasant came home on the third day as he had said he
would, and at once inquired if the cows were sold. "Yes, indeed,
dear Hans," answered the woman, "and as you said, for two hun- dred thalers. They are scarcely worth so much, but the man took
them without making any objection." "Where is the money?" asked
the peasant. "Oh, I have not got the money," replied the woman;
"he had happened to forget his money-belt, but he will soon bring
it, and he left good seciuity behind him." "What kind of security?"
asked the man. "One of the three cows, which he shall not have until he has paid for the other two. I have managed very cunningly,
for I have kept the smallest, which eats the least." The man was enraged and lifted up his stick, and was just going to give her the
beating he had promised her. Suddenly he let the stick faU and
said, "You are the stupidest goose that ever waddled on God's earth, but I am sorry for you. I will go out into the highways and
wait for three days to see if I find any one who is still stupider than
you. If I succeed in doing so, you shall go scot-free, but if I do not
find him, you shall receive your well-deserved reward without any
discount." He went out into the great highways, sat down on a stone, and
waited for what would happen. Then he saw a peasant's wagon coming towards him, and a woman was standing upright in the mid- dle of it, instead of sitting on the bundle of straw which was lying
beside her, or walking near the oxen and leading them. The man
thought to himself, "That is certainly one of the kind I am in search
of," and jumped up and ran backwards and forwards in front of the
wagon like one who is not very wise. "What do you want, my
friend?" said the woman to him; "I don't know you, where do you
come from?" "I have fallen down from Heaven," replied the man,
"and don't know how to get back again; couldn't you drive me up?"
"No," said the woman, "I don't know the way, but if you come from Heaven you can surely tell me how my husband, who has
been there these three years, is. You must have seen him?" "Oh,
Wise Folks 549
yes, I have seen him, but all men can't get on well. He keeps sheep, and the sheep give him a great deal to do. They run up the mountains and lose their way in the wilderness, and he has to run after
them and drive them together again. His clothes are all torn to
pieces too, and will soon fall off his body. There is no tailor there,
for Saint Peter won't let any of them in, as you know by the story."
"Who would have thought it?" cried the woman. "I tell you what, I will fetch his Sunday coat which is still hanging at home in the
cupboard; he can wear that and look respectable. You will be so
kind as to take it with you." "That won't do very well," answered
the peasant; "people are not allowed to take clothes into Heaven,
they are taken away from one at the gate."
"Then Hsten," said the woman, '1 sold my fine wheat yesterday and got a good lot of money for it; I will send that to him. If you
hide the pinse in your pocket, no one will know that you have it."
"If you can't manage it any other way," said the peasant, "I will do
you that favor." "Just sit still where you are," said she, "and I will drive home and fetch the purse, I shall soon be back again. I do not
sit down on the bundle of straw, but stand up in the wagon, because it makes it lighter for the cattle." She drove her oxen away,
and the peasant thought, "That woman has a perfect talent for folly, if she really brings the money, my wife may think herself fortunate, for she will get no beating." It was not long before she came in a great hurry with the money, and with her own hands put it in
his pocket. Before she went away, she thanked him again a thousand times for his courtesy.
When the woman got home again, she found her son who had
come in from the field. She told him what unlooked-for things had
befallen her, and then added, "I am truly delighted at having found an opportunity of sending something to my poor husband.
Who would ever have imagined that he could be suffering for want
of anything up in Heaven?"
The son was full of astonishment. "Mother," said he, "it is not every day that a man comes from Heaven in this way, I will go out
immediately, and see if he is still to be found; he must tell me what
it is like up there, and how the work is done." He saddled the horse and rode off with all speed. He found the peasant who was sitting
rmder a willow tree, and was just going to count the money in the
purse. "Have you seen the man who has fallen down from
Heaven?" cried the youth to him. "Yes," answered the peasant, "he has set out on his way back there, and has gone up that hill, from
whence it will be rather nearer; you could still catch him if you
550 Grimm*s Complete Fairy Tales
were to ride fast." "Alas," said the youth, *1 have been doing tiring work all day, and the ride here has completely worn me out; you
know the man, be so kind as to get on my horse, and go and persuade him to come here." "Aha!" thought the peasant, "here is another who has no wick in his lampl" "Why should I not do you this
favor?" said he, and mounted the horse and rode off in a quick trot. The youth remained sitting there till night fell, but the peasant
never came back. "The man from Heaven must certainly have been
in a great hurry, and would not turn back," thought he, "and the
peasant has no doubt given him the horse to take to my father." He went home and told his mother what had happened, and that he
had sent his father the horse so that he might not have to be always
running about. "You have done well," answered she, "yornr legs are
younger than his, and you can go on foot." When the peasant got home, he put the horse in the stable beside
the cow which he had as a pledge, and then went to his wife and
said, "Trina, as your luck would have it, I have found two who are still sillier fools than you; this time you escape without a beating; I
wdll store it up for another occasion." Then he lighted his pipe, sat
down in his grandfather's chair, and said, "It was a good stroke of business to get a sleek horse and a great purse full of money into
the bargain, for two lean cows. If stupidity always brought in as
much as that I would be quite willing to hold it in honor." So thought the peasant, but you no doubt prefer the simple folks.
The Lazy Spinner
In a certain village there once lived a man and his wife. The wife
was so idle that she would never work at anything; whatever her
husband gave her to spin, she did not get done, and what she did
spin she did not wind, but let it all remain entangled in a heap. If
the man scolded her, she was always ready with her tongue, and
said, "WeU, how should I vdnd it, when I have no reel? Just you go
into the forest and get me one." "If that is all," said the man, "then
I will go into the forest, and get some wood for making reels." Then the woman was afraid that if he had the wood he would
make her a reel of it, and she would have to wind her yam off, and
then begin to spin again. She bethought herself a Httle, and then a
The Lazy Spinner 551
lucky idea occurred to her, and she secredy followed the man into
the forest, and when he had cHmbed into a tree to choose and cut
the wood, she crept into the thicket below where he could not see
her, and cried,
"He who cuts wood for reels shall die.
And he who winds, shall perish."
The man listened, laid down his axe for a moment, and began to
consider what that could mean. "Hollo," he said at last, "what can
that have been; my ears must have been singing; I won't alarm myself for nothing." So he again seized the axe, and began to hew; then again there came a cry from below:
"He who cuts wood for reels shall die.
And he who winds, shall perish."
He stopped, and felt afraid and alarmed, and pondered over the
circumstance. But when a few moments had passed, he took heart
again, and a third time he stretched out his hand for the axe, and
began to cut. But some one called out a third time, and said loudly,
"He who cuts wood for reels shall die.
And he who winds, shall perish."
That was enough for him, and all inclination had departed from
him, so he hastily descended the tree, and set out on his way home.
The woman ran as fast as she could by byways so as to get home
first. So when he entered the parlor, she put on an innocent look as
if nothing had happened, and said, "Well, have you brought a nice
piece of wood for reels?" "No," said he, "I see very well that winding won't do," and told her what had happened to him in the forest, and from that time forth left her in peace about it.
Nevertheless, after some time, the man again began to complain
of the disorder in the house. "Wife," said he, "it is really a shame
that the spun yam should lie there all entangledl" "I'll teU you
what," said she, "as we still don't come by any reel, go you up into the loft, and I will stand down below, and will throw the yam up to
you, and you will throw it down to me, and so we shall get a skein
after all." "Yes, that will do," said the man. So they did that, and
when it was done, he said, "The yam is in skeins, now it must be
boiled." The woman was again distressed; she said certainly, "Yes,
we will boil it tomorrow moming early," but she was secretly con- triving another trick.
Early in the moming she got up, lighted a fire, and put the kettle
552 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
on, only instead of the yam, she put in a lump of tow, and let it
boil. After that she went to the man, who was stiU lying in bed, and
said to him, "I must just go out, you must get up and look after the yam which is in the kettle on the fire, but you must be at hand at
once; mind that, for if the cock should happen to crow, and you are
not attending to the yam, it will become tow." The man was willing and took good care not to loiter. He got up
as quickly as he could, and went into the kitchen. But when he
reached the kettle and peeped in, he saw, to his horror, nothing but
a lump of tow. Then the poor man was as still as a mouse, thinking
he had neglected it, and was to blame, and in future said no more
about yam and spinning. But you yourself must own she was an odious womanl
The Three Sluggards
A CERTAIN King had three sons who were aU equally dear to him,
and he did not know which of them to appoint as his successor after his own death. When the time came when he was about to
die, he simmioned them to his bedside and said, "Dear children, I have been thinking of something which I wiU declare unto you;
whichsoever of you is the laziest shall have the kingdom."
The eldest said, **Then, father, the kingdom is mine, for I am so idle that if I lie down to rest, and a drop falls in my eye, I wiU not
open it that I may sleep."
The second said, 'Tather, the kingdom belongs to me, for I am so idle that when I am sitting by the fire warming myself, I would
rather let my heel be burnt off than draw back my leg."
The third said, "Father, the kingdom is mine, for I am so idle that if I were going to be hanged, and had the rope already round
my neck, and any one put a sharp knife into my hand with which I
might cut the rope, I would rather let myself be hanged than raise
my hand to the rope."
When the father heard that, he said, "You have carried it the farthest, and shall be King."
The Twelve Idle Servants
Twelve servants who had done nothing dining the day would not
exert themselves at night either, but laid themselves on the grass
and boasted of their idleness. The first said, "What is your laziness to me, I have to concern myself about mine own? The care of my
body is my principal work; I eat not a little and drink still more.
When I have had four meals, I fast a short time imtil I feel hunger
again, and that suits me best. To rise betimes is not for me; when it
is getting near midday, I already seek out a resting-place for my- self. If the master call, I do exactly as if I had not heard him, and if
he call for the second time, I wait a while before I get up, and go
to him very slowly. In this way life is endurable."
The second said, "I have a horse to look after, but I leave the bit in his mouth, and if I do not want to do it, I give him no food, and
I say he has had it already. I, however, lay myself in the oat-chest and sleep for four hours. After this I stretch out one foot and move
it a couple of times over the horse's body, and then he is combed and cleaned. Who is going to make a great business of that? Nevertheless service is too toilsome for me."
The third said, "Why plague oneself with work? Nothing comes of iti I laid myself in the sun, and fell asleep. It began to rain a Httle, but why should I get up? I let it rain on in God's name. At last came a splashing shower, so heavy indeed, that it pulled the hair
out of my head and washed it away, and I got a hole in the skuU; I
put a plaster on it, and then it was all right. I have already had several injuries of that kind."
The foiuth said, "If I am to undertake a piece of work, I first loiter about for an horn* that I may save up my strength. After that I begin quite slowly, and ask if no one is there who could help me.
Then I let him do the chief of the work, and in reality only look on;
but that also is still too much for me."
The fifth said, "What does that matter? Just think, I am to take
away the manure from the horse's stable, and load the cart vdth it. I let it go on slowly, and if I have taken anything on the fork, I only
half-raise it up, and then I rest just a quarter of an hour until I
quite throw it in. It is enough and to spare if I take out a cartful in
the day. I have no fancy for killing myself with work."
554 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
The sixth said, "Shame on you. I am afraid of no work, but I lie down for three weeks, and never once take my clothes off. What is
the use of buckling your shoes on? For aught I care they may fall
off my feet, it is no matter. If I am going up some steps, I drag one
foot slowly after the other on to the first step, and then I count the
rest of them that I may know where I must rest."
The seventh said, "That will not do with me. My master looks after my work, only he is not at home the whole day. But I neglect
nothing, I run as fast as it is possible to do when one crawls. If I am
to get on, foiur sturdy men must push me with aU their might. I
came where six men were lying sleeping on a bed beside each
other. I lay down by them and slept too. There was no wakening
me again, and when they wanted to have me home, they had to
carry me."
The eighth said, "I see plainly that I am the only active fellow; if a stone He before me, I do not give myself the trouble to raise my
legs and step over it. I lay myself down on the ground, and if I am
wet and covered with mud and dirt, I stay lying imtil the sun has
dried me again. At the very most, I only turn myself so that it can
shine on me."
The ninth said, "That is the right wayl Today the bread was be- fore me, but I was too idle to take it, and nearly died of hungerl
Moreover a jug stood by it, but it was so big and heavy that I did
not like to lift it up, and preferred bearing thirst. Just to turn myself round was too much for mel I remained lying like a log the
whole day."
The tenth said, "Laziness has brought misfortune on me, a bro- ken leg and swollen calf. Three of us were lying in the road, and I
had my legs stretched out. Some one came with a cart, and the
wheels went over me. I might indeed have drawn my legs back, but
I did not hear the cart coming, for the midges were humming about
my ears, and creeping in at my nose and out again at my mouth;
who can take the trouble to drive the vermin away?"
The eleventh said, "I gave up my place yesterday. I had no fancy for carrying the heavy books to my master any longer or fetching
them away again. There was no end of it all day long. But to teU
the truth, he gave me my dismissal, and would not keep me any
longer, for his clothes, which I had left lying in the dust, were all
moth-eaten, and I am very glad of it."
The twelfth said, "Today I had to drive the cart into the country, and made myself a bed of straw on it, and had a good sleep. The
reins slipped out of my hand, and when I awoke, the horse had
Lazy Harry 555
nearly torn itself loose; the harness was gone, the strap which fastened the horse to the shafts was gone, and so were the collar, the
bridle and bit. Some one had come by, who had carried all off. Besides this, the cart had got into a quagmire and stuck fast. I left it
standing, and stretched myself on the straw again. At last the
master came himself, and pushed the cart out, and if he had not
come I should not be lying here but there, and sleeping tranquilly."
Lazy Harry
Harry was lazy, and although he had nothing else to do but drive
his goat daily to pasture, he nevertheless groaned when he went
home after his day's work was done. "It is a heavy burden," said
he, "and a wearisome employment to drive a goat into the field this way year after year, till late into the autumni If one could but lie
down and sleep, but no, one must have one's eyes open lest it hurts the young trees, or squeezes itself through the hedge into a garden,
or runs away altogether. How can one have any rest, or peace of
one's hfe?" He seated himself, collected his thoughts, and consid- ered how he could set his shoulders free from this burden.
For a long time all thinking was to no purpose, but suddenly it
was as if scales fell from his eyes. "I know what I will do," he
cried, "I will marry fat Trina who has also a goat, and can take mine out with hers, and then I shall have no more need to trouble
myself." So Harry got up, set his weary legs in motion, and went right
across the street, for it was no farther, to where the parents of fat
Trina lived, and asked for their industrious and virtuous daughter
in marriage. The parents did not reflect long. "Birds of a feather,
flock together," they thought, and consented.
So fat Trina became Harry's wife and led out both the goats. Harry had a good time and had no work to rest from but his own
idleness. He went out with her only now and then, and said, "I merely do it that I may afterwards enjoy rest more; otherwise one
loses all feeling for it."
Fat Trina was no less idle. "Dear Harry," said she one day, "why should we make our Hves so toilsome when there is no need for it,
and thus ruin the best days of our youth? Would it not be better for
556 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
us to give the two goats which disturb us every morning in our
sweetest sleep with their bleating, to our neighbor, and he will give
us a beehive for them? We will put the beehive in a sunny place
behind the house, and trouble ourselves no more about it. Bees do
not require to be taken care of, or driven into the field; they fly out
and find the way home again for themselves, and collect honey
without giving the very least trouble." "You have spoken like a sensible woman," repfied Harry. "We will carry out your proposal without delay; and besides all that, honey tastes better and
nourishes one better than goat's milk, and it can be kept longer,
too." The neighbor willingly gave a beehive for the two goats. The
bees flew in and out from early morning till late evening without
ever tiring, and filled the hive with the most beautiful honey, so
that in autumn Harry was able to take a whole pitcherful out of it.
They placed the jug on a board which was fixed to the wall of
their bed-room, and as they were afraid that it might be stolen
from them, or that the mice might find it, Trina brought in a stout
hazel-stick and put it beside her bed, so that without unnecessary
getting up she might reach it with her hand, and drive away the
uninvited guests.
Lazy Harry did not Hke to leave his bed before noon. "He who
rises early," said he, "wastes his substance." One morning when he was still lying among the feathers in broad
daylight, resting after his long sleep, he said to his wife, "Women are fond of sweet things, and you are always tasting the honey in
private; it will be better for us to exchange it for a goose with a
young gosling, before you eat up the whole of it." "But," answered
Trina, "not before we have a child to take care of them I Am I to worry myself with the Httle geese, and spend all my strength on
them to no purpose?" "Do you think," said Harry, "that the young- ster will look after geese? Nowadays children no longer obey; they
do according to their own fancy, because they consider themselves
cleverer than their parents, just Hke that lad who was sent to seek
the cow and chased three blackbirds." "Oh," repHed Trina, "this one shall fare badly if he does not do what I sayl I will take a stick and belabor his skin for him with more blows than I can coimt.
Look, Harry," cried she in her zeal, and seized the stick which she
had to drive the mice away with, "Look, this is the way I will faU
on himl" She reached her arm out to strike, but unhappily, hit the honey-
Odds and Ends 557
pitcher above the bed. The pitcher struck against the wall and fell
down in fragments, and the fine honey streamed down on the
ground. "There lie the goose and the young gosling," said Harry,
"and want no looking after. But it is lucky that the pitcher did not
fall on my head. We have all reason to be satisfied with our lot." And then as he saw that there was still some honey in one of the
fragments he stretched out his hand for it, and said quite gaily,
"The remains, my wife, we will still eat with a relish, and we will rest a fittle after the fright we have had. What matters if we do get
up a little later— the day is always long enough." "Yes," answered
Trina, "we shall always get to the end of it at the proper time. Do you know that the snail was once asked to a wedding and set out to
go? Instead, it arrived at the christening. In front of the house it
fell over the fence, and said, 'Speed does no good.' "
Odds and Ends
There was once on a time a maiden who was pretty, but idle and
negligent. When she had to spin she was so out of temper that if
there was a fittle knot in the flax, she at once pulled out a whole
heap of it, and strewed it about on the ground beside her. Now she
had a servant who was industrious, and gathered together the bits
of flax which were thrown away, cleaned them, span them fine, and
had a beautiful gown made out of them for herself.
A young man had wooed the lazy girl, and the wedding was to
take place. On the eve of the wedding, the industrious one was
dancing merrily about in her pretty dress, and the bride said, "Ah,
how that girl does jump about, dressed in my odds and ends." The bridegroom heard that, and asked the bride what she meant
by it. Then she told him that the girl was wearing a dress made of
the flax which she had thrown away. When ^W. bridegroom heard
that and saw how idle she was, and how industrious the poor girl
was, he gave the lazy girl up, went to the other, and chose her as his wife.
Brides on Trial
Thebe was once a young shepherd who wished much to marry, and
was acquainted with three sisters who were all equally pretty, so
that it was difficult to him to make a choice, and he could not decide to give the preference to any one of them.
Then he asked his mother for advice, and she said, "Invite all three, and set some cheese before them, and watch how they eat
it." The youth did so. The first, however, swallowed the cheese with the rind on; the second hasti^ out the rind ofif the cheese, but she
cut it so quickly that she left much good cheese with it, and threw
that away also; the third peeled the rind ofiF carefully, and cut nei- ther too much nor too little.
The shepherd told all this to his mother, who said, "Take the
third for your wife." This he did, and Hved contendedly and hap- pily with her.
The Spindle, the Shuttle,
and the Needle
Thebe was oftce a girl whose father and mother died while she was
still a little child. All alone, in a small house at the end of the village, dwelt her godmother, who supported herself by spinning,
weaving, and sewing. The old woman took the forlorn child to Hve
with her, kept her to her work, and educated her in all that is good.
When the girl was fifteen years old, the old woman became ill,
called the child to her bedside, and said, "Dear daughter, I feel my end drawing near. I leave you the Httle house, which will protect
you from wind and weather; and my spindle, shuttle, and needle,
with which you can earn your bread." Then she laid her hands on
the girl's head, blessed her, and said, "Only preserve the love of
God in your heart, and all will go well with you." Thereupon she closed her eyes, and when she was laid in the earth, the maiden fol-
The Spindle, the Shuttle, and the Needle 559
lowed the coflBn, weeping bitterly, and paid her the last mark of respect.
And now the maiden lived quite alone in the little house, and
was industrious, and span, wove, and sewed, and the blessing of the
good old woman was on all that she did. It seemed as if the flax in
the room increased of its own accord, and whenever she wove a
piece of cloth or carpet, or had made a shirt, she at once found a
buyer who paid her amply for it, so that she was in want of nothing, and even had something to share with others.
About this time, the son of the King was traveling about the
country looking for a bride. He was not to choose a poor one, and
did not want to have a rich one. So he said, "She shall be my wife
who is the poorest, and at the same time the richest." When he came to the village where the maiden dwelt, he inquired, as he did
wherever he went, who was the richest and also the poorest girl in
the place. They first named the richest; the poorest, they said, was
the girl who hved in the small house quite at the end of the village.
The rich girl was sitting in all her splendor before the door of her
house, and when the Prince approached her, she got up, went to
meet him, and made him a low curtsey. He looked at her, said
nothing, and rode on. When he came to the house of the poor girl,
she was not standing at the door, but sitting in her httle room. He
stopped his horse, and saw through the window, on which the
bright sun was shining, the girl sitting at her spinning-wheel, busily
spinning. She looked up, and when she saw that the Prince was
looking in, she blushed all over her face, let her eyes fall, and went
on spinning. I do not know whether, just at that moment, the
thread was quite even; but she went on spinning until the King's son had ridden away again. Then she went to the window, opened
it, and said, "It is so warm in this room I" But she still looked after him as long as she could distinguish the white feathers in his hat.
Then she sat down to work again in her own room and went on
with her spinning, and a saying which the old woman had often
repeated when she was sitting at her work, came into her mind, and
she sang these words to herself:
"Spindle, my spindle, haste, haste thee away.
And here to my house bring the wooer, I pray."
And what do you think happened? The spindle sprang out of her
hand in an instant, and out of the door, and when, in her astonishment, she got up and looked after it, she saw that it was dancing
560 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
out merrily into the open country, and drawing a shining golden
thread after it. Before long, it had entirely vanished from her sight.
As she had now no spindle, the girl took the weaver's shuttle in her hand, sat down to her loom, and began to weave.
The spindle, however, danced continually onwards, and just as
the thread came to an end, reached the Prince. "What do I see?" he
cried; "the spindle certainly wants to show me the wayl" He turned his horse about, and rode back with the golden thread. The girl
was, however, sitting at her work singing,
"Shuttle, my shuttle, weave well this day.
And guide the wooer to me, I pray."
Immediately the shuttle sprang out of her hand and out by the
door. Before the threshold, however, it began to weave a carpet
which was more beautiful than the eyes of man had ever yet be- held. LiHes and roses blossomed on both sides of it, and on a
golden ground in the center green branches ascended, under which
bounded hares and rabbits; stags and deer stretched their heads in
between them, brightly colored birds were sitting in the branches
above; they lacked nothing but the gift of song. The shuttle leapt
hither and thither, and everything seemed to grow of its own ac- cord.
As the shuttle had run away, the girl sat down to sew. She held
the needle in her hand and sang,
"Needle, my needle, sharp-pointed and fine,
Prepare for a wooer this house of mine."
Then the needle leapt out of her fingers, and flew everywhere
about the room as quick as Hghtning. It was just as if invisible
spirits were working; they covered tables and benches with green
cloth in an instant, and the chairs with velvet, and hung the windows with silken curtains. Hardly had the needle put in the last
stitch than the maiden saw through the window the white feathers
of the Prince, whom the spindle had brought thither by the golden
thread. He alighted, stepped over the carpet into the house, and
when he entered the room, there stood the maiden in her poor garments, but she shone out from within them like a rose surrounded
by leaves. "You are the poorest and also the richest," said he to her.
"Come with me; you shall be my bride." She did not speak, but she gave him her hand. Then he gave her a kiss, led her forth, lifted her
on to his horse, and took her to the royal castle, where the wedding
The Peasant's Wise Daughter 561
was solemnized with great rejoicings. The spindle, shuttle, and
needle were preserved in the treasure-chamber, and held in great honor.
The Peasant's Wise Daughter
A POOR PEASANT had no land but only a small house and one daughter. Then said the daughter, "We ought to ask oiu: lord the King for
a bit of newly cleared land." When the King heard of their poverty, he presented them with a bit of land, which she and her father dug
up, and intended to sow -with a little com and grain of that land. When they had dug nearly the whole of the field, they found in the
earth a mortar made of pure gold. "Listen," said the father to the
girl, "as our lord the King has been so gracious and presented us
with the field, we ought to give him this mortar in return for it."
The daughter, however, would not consent to this, and said, "Fa- ther, if we have the mortar without having the pestle as well, we
shall have to get the pestle, so you had much better say nothing
about it." He would, however, not obey her, but took the mortar and carried it to the King, said that he had found it in the cleared
land, and asked if he would accept it as a present.
The King took the mortar, and asked if he had found nothing besides that. "No," answered the countryman. Then the King said that he must now bring him the pestle. The peasant said they had
not found that, but he might just as well have spoken to the wind;
he was put in prison, and was to stay there until he produced the
pestle. The servants had daily to carry him bread and water, which
is what people get in prison, and they heard how the man cried out
continually, "Ahl if I had but listened to my daughterl Alas, alas, if
I had but listened to my daughterl" Then the servants went to the King and told him how the prisoner was always crying, "Ahl if I had but listened to my daughterl" and would neither eat nor drink. So he commanded the servants to
bring the prisoner before him, and then the King asked the peasant
why he was always crying, "Ahl if I had but listened to my daughterl" and what it was that his daughter had said. "She told me that I ought not to take the mortar to you, for I should have to produce
the pestle as well." "If you have a daughter who is as wise as that.
562 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
let her come here." She was therefore obliged to appear before the King, who asked her if she reaUy was so wise, and said he would
set her a riddle, and if she could guess that, he would marry her.
She at once said yes, she would guess it. Then said the King,
"Come to me not clothed, not naked, not riding, not walking, not ia the road, and not out of the road, and if thou canst do that I will
marry thee." So she went away, put off everything she had on, and then she
was not clothed, and took a great fishing net, and seated herself in
it and wrapped it entirely round and round her, and then she was
not naked; and she hired an ass, and tied the fisherman's net to its tail, so that it was forced to drag her along, and that was neither
riding nor walking. The ass had also to drag her in the ruts, so that
she only touched the ground with her great toe, and that was neither being in the road nor out of the road. And when she arrived in
that fashion, the King said she had guessed the riddle and fulfilled all the conditions. Then he ordered her father to be released from
the prison, took her to wife, and gave into her care all the royal
possessions.
Now when some years had passed, the King was once drawing
up his troops on parade, when it happened that some peasants who
had been selling wood stopped with their wagons before the pal- ace; some of them had oxen yoked to them, and some horses. There
was one peasant who had three horses, one of which was delivered
of a young foal, and it ran away and lay down between two oxen
which were in front of the wagon. When the peasants came together, they began to dispute, to beat each other and make a dis- turbance, and the peasant with the oxen wanted to keep the foal,
and said one of the oxen had given birth to it, and the other said
his horse had had it, and that it was his.
The quarrel came before the King, and he gave the verdict that
the foal should stay where it had been found, and so the peasant
with the oxen, to whom it did not belong, got it. Then the other
went away, and wept and lamented over his foal. Now he had
heard how gracious his lady the Queen was because she herself had
sprung from poor peasant folks, so he went to her and begged her
to see Lf she could not help him to get his foal back again. Said she,
"Yes, I will tell you what to do, if you wiU promise me not to be- tray me. Early tomorrow morning, when the King parades the
guard, place yourself there in the middle of the road by which he
must pass, take a great fishing-net and pretend to be fishing; go on
fishing too, and empty out the net as if you had got it fuU"— and
The Peasant's Wise Daughter 563
then she told him also what he was to say if he was questioned by
the King. The next day, therefore, the peasant stood there, and
fished on dry ground.
When the King passed by, and saw that, he sent his messenger to
ask what the stupid man was about. He answered, "I am fishing." The messenger asked how he could fish when there was no water
whatever there. The peasant said, "It is as easy for me to fish on
dry land as it is for an ox to have a foal." The messenger went back and took the answer to the King, who ordered the peasant to be
brought to him. The peasant told him that this was not his own
idea, and the King wanted to know whose it was. The peasant must
confess that at once. The peasant, however, would not do so, and
said always, God forbid he shouldl— the idea was his own. They
laid him, however, on a heap of straw, and beat him and tormented
him so long that at last he admitted that he had got the idea from
the Queen.
When the King reached home again, he said to his wife, "Why hast thou behaved so falsely to me? I will not have thee any longer
for a wife; thy time is up, go back to the place from whence thou
camest— to thy peasant's hut." One favor, however, he granted her; she might take with her the one thing that was dearest and best in
her eyes; and thus was she dismissed. She said, 'Tes, my dear husband, if thou commandest this, I will do it," and she embraced him and kissed him, and said she would take leave of him. Then she ordered a powerful sleeping draught to be brought, to drink farewell
to him; the King took a long draught, but she took only a little. He
soon fell into a deep sleep, and when she perceived that, she called
a servant and took a fair white Hnen cloth and wrapped the King in
it, and the servant was forced to carry him into a carriage that
stood before the door, and she drove with him to her own httle
house. She laid him in her own httle bed, and he slept one day and
one night without awakening, and when he awoke he looked round
and said, "Good GodI where am I?" He called his attendants, but none of them were there.
At length his wife came to his bedside and said, "My dear lord and King, thou toldest me I might bring away with me from the
palace that which was dearest and most precious in my eyes— I have nothing more precious and dear than thyself, so I have
brought thee with me." Tears rose to the King's eyes and he said,
"Dear wife, thou shalt be mine and I will be thine," and he took her back with liim to the royal palace and was married again to
her, and at the present time they are very fikely still Hving.
The Shepherd Boy
Once upon a time there was a shepherd boy whose fame spread 'far
and wide because of the wise answers which he gave to every question. The King of the country heard of it hkewise, but did not believe it, and sent for the boy. Then he said to him, If you can give
me an answer to three questions which I will ask you, I will look on
you as my own child, and you shall dwell with me in my royal palace." The boy said, "What are the three questions?"
The King said, "The first is, how many drops of water are there
in the ocean?" The shepherd boy answered, "Lord King, if you will have all the rivers on earth dammed up so that not a single drop
rims from them into the sea until I have counted it, I will tell you
how many drops there are in the sea."
The King said, "The next question is, how many stars are there
in the sky?" The shepherd boy said, "Give me a great sheet of
white paper," and then he made so many fine points on it with a pen that they could scarcely be seen, and it was all but impossible
to coimt them; any one who looked at them would have lost his
sight. Then he said, "There are as many stars in the sky as there are
points on the paper; just coimt them." But no one was able to do it.
The King said, "The third question is, how many seconds of time
are there in eternity?" Then said the shepherd boy, "In Lower Pomerania is the Diamond Mountain, which is two miles and a half
high, two miles and a half wide, and two miles and a half in depth;
every hundred years a httle bird comes and sharpens its beak on it,
and when the whole mountain is worn away by this, then the first
second of eternity will be over."
The King said, "You have answered the three questions hke a wise man, and you shall henceforth dweE with me in my royal palace, and I will regard you as my own child."
The Master-Thief
One day an old man and his wife were sitting in front of a dilapidated house resting a while from their work. Suddenly a splendid
carriage with four black horses came driving up, and a richlydressed man descended from it. The peasant stood up, went to the
great man, and asked what he wanted, and in what way he could
be useful to him. The stranger stretched out his hand to the old
man, and said, "I want nothing but to enjoy for once a country dish. Cook me some potatoes, in the way you always have them,
and then I will sit down at your table and eat them with pleasure."
The peasant smiled and said, "You are a coimt or a Prince, or per- haps even a duke; noble gentlemen often have such fancies, but
you shall have your wish." The wife went into the kitchen, and began to wash and rub the potatoes, and to make them into balls,
as they are eaten by the country-folks.
While she was busy with this work, the peasant said to the
stranger, "Come into my garden with me for a while, I have still
something to do there." He had dug some holes in the garden, and
now wanted to plant some trees in them. "Have you no children,"
asked the stranger, "who could help you with your work?" "No,"
answered the peasant, "I had a son, it is true, but it is long since he
went out into the world. He was a ne'er-do-well; sharp, and know- ing, but he would learn nothing and was full of bad tricks; at last
he ran away from me, and since then I have heard nothing of him." The old man took a young tree, put it in a hole, drove in a post
beside it, and when he had shoveled in some earth and had trampled it firmly down, he tied the stem of the tree above, below, and
in the middle, fast to the post by a rope of straw. "But tell me,"
said the stranger, "why you don't tie that crooked knotted tree, which is lying in the comer there, bent down almost to the groimd,
to a post also that it may grow straight, as well as these?" The old
man smiled and said, "Sir, you speak according to your knowledge,
it is easy to see that you are not familiar with gardening. That tree
there is old, and misshapen, no one can make it straight now. Trees
must be trained while they are young."
"That is how it was with your son," said the stranger, "if you had trained him while he was still young, he would not have run away;
566 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
now he too must have grown hard and misshapen." "Truly it is a
long time since he went away," replied the old man, "he must have
changed." "Would you know him again if he were to come to you?"
asked the stranger. "Hardly by his face," replied the peasant, "but he has a mark about him, a birth-mark on his shoulder, that looks
hke a bean." When he had said that the stranger puUed off his coat,
bared his shoulder, and showed the peasant the bean. "Good God!"
cried the old man, "you are really my sonl" and love for his child
stirred in his heart. "But," he added, "how can you be my son? You have become a great lord and Hve in wealth and luxury. How have
you contrived to do that?" "Ah, father," answered the son, "the young tree was bound to no post and has grown crooked; now it is
too old, it will never be straight again. How have I got all that? I
have become a thief, but do not be alarmed, I am a master-thief.
For me there are neither locks nor bolts, whatsoever I desire is
mine. Do not imagine that I steal like a common thiefl I only take
some of the superfluity of the rich. Poor people are safe! I would
rather give to them than take anything from them. It is the same
with anything which I can have without trouble, cunning and dexterity—I never touch it." "Alas, my son," said the father, "it still does not please me, a thief is still a thief, I tell you it will end
badly." He took him to his mother, and when she heard that was her son, she wept for joy, but when he told her that he had become
a master-thief, two streams flowed down over her face. At length
she said, "Even if he has become a thief, he is still my son, and my
eyes have beheld him once more." They sat down to table, and once again he ate with his parents the wretched food which he had
not eaten for so long. The father said, "If our Lord, the count up therie in the castle, leams who you are and what trade you follow,
he will not take you in his arms and cradle you in them as he did
when he held you at the font, but will cause you to swing from a
halter." "Be easy, father, he will do me no harm, for I understand
my trade. I will go to him myself this very day." When evening drew near, the master-thief seated himself in his
carriage, and drove to the castle. The count received him civilly, for
he took him for a distinguished man. When, however, the stranger
made himself known, the count turned pale and was quite silent for
some time. At length he said, "You are my godson, and on that ac- count mercy shall take the place of justice, and I will deal leniently
with you. Since you pride yourself on being a master-thief, I will put your art to the proof, but if you do not stand the test, you must
marry the rope-maker's daughter, and the croaking of the raven
The Master-Thief 567
must be your music on the occasion." "Lord count," answered the
master-thief, "Think of three things as difficult as you like, and if I
do not perform your tasks, do with me what you will." The count
reflected for some minutes, and then said, "Well, then, in the first place, you shall steal the horse I keep for my own riding, out of the
stable; in the next, you shall steal the sheet from beneath the bodies
of my wife and myself when we are asleep, without our observing
it, and the wedding-ring of my wife as well; thirdly and lastly, you shall steal away out of the church, the parson and clerk. Mark what
I am saying, for your life depends on it." The master-thief went to the nearest town; there he bought the
clothes of an old peasant woman, and put them on. Then he stained
his face brown, and painted wrinkles on it as well, so that no one
could have recognized him. Then he filled a small cask with old
Hungary wine in which was mixed a powerful sleeping-drink. He
put the cask in a basket, which he took on his back, and walked
with slow and tottering steps to the count's castle. It was akeady dark when he arrived. He sat down on a stone in the court-yard
and began to cough, like an asthmatic old woman, and to rub his hands as if he were cold.
In front of the door of the stable some soldiers were lying round
a fire; one of them observed the woman, and called out to her,
"Come nearer, old mother, and warm yourself beside us. After all, you have no bed for the night, and must take one where you can
find it." The old woman tottered up to them, begged them to lift the basket from her back, and sat down beside them at the fire.
"What have you got in the little cask, old lady?" asked one. "A
good mouthful of vdne," she answered. "I five by trade; for money
and fair words I am quite ready to let you have a glass." "Let us
have it here, then," said the soldier, and when he had tasted one
glass he said, "When wine is good, I like another glass," and had
another poiu-ed out for himself, and the rest followed his example.
"Hallo, comrades," cried one of them to those who were in the stable, "here is an old goody who has wine that is as old as herself;
take a draught, it will warm yoiu" stomachs far better than our fire." The old woman carried her cask into the stable. One of the soldiers
had seated himself on the saddled riding-horse, another held its bridle in his hand, a third had laid hold of its tail. She poured out as
much as they wanted until the spring ran dry.
It was not long before the bridle fell from the hand of the one,
and he fell down and began to snore, the other left hold of the tail,
lay down and snored still louder. The one who was sitting in the
568 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
saddle, did remain sitting, but bent his head ahnost down to the
horse's neck, and slept and blew with his mouth hke the bellows of a forge. The soldiers outside had already been asleep for a long
time, and were lying on the ground motionless, as if dead. When
the master-thief saw that he had succeeded, he gave the first a rope
in his hand instead of the bridle, and the other who had been holding the tail, a wisp of straw, but what was he to do with the one
who was sitting on the horse's back? He did not want to throw him down, for he might have awakened and have uttered a cry. He had
a good idea; he imbuckled the girths of the saddle, tied a couple of
ropes which were hanging to a ring on the wall fast to the saddle,
and drew the sleeping rider up into the air on it, then he twisted
the rope round the posts, and made it fast. He soon imloosed the
horse from the chain, but if he had ridden over the stony pavement
of the yard they would have heard the noise in the castle. So he
viTrapped the horse's hoofs in old rags, led him carefully out, leapt upon him, and galloped oflF.
When day broke, the master galloped to the castle on the stolen
horse. The count had just got up, and was looking out of the window. "Good morning, Sir Count," he cried to him, "here is the horse, which I have got safely out of the stable! Just look, how
beautifully your soldiers are lying there sleeping; and if you will
but go into the stable, you will see how comfortable your watchers
have made it for themselves." The coimt could not help laughing,
then he said, "For once you have succeeded, but things won't go so well the second time, and I warn you that if you come before me as
a thief, I will handle you as I would a thief." When the countess went to bed that night, she closed her hand
Vidth the wedding-ring tightly together, and the count said, "All the doors are locked and bolted, I will keep awake and wait for the
thief, but if he gets in by the window, I will shoot him." The master-thief, however, went in the dark to the gallows, cut a poor
sinner who was hanging there down from the halter, and carried
him on his back to the castle. Then he set a ladder up to the bedroom, put the dead body on his shoulders, and began to climb up.
When he had got so high that the head of the dead man showed at
the window, the count, who was watching in his bed, fired a pistol
at him, and immediately the master let the poor sinner fall down,
and hid himself in one comer. The night was sufficiently lighted by
the moon, for the master to see distinctly how the count got out of
the window on to the ladder, came down, carried the dead body
into the garden, and began to dig a hole in which to lay it.
The Master-Thief 569
"Now," thought the thief, "the favorable moment has come," stole nimbly out of his comer, and climbed up the ladder straight
into the countess's bedroom. "Dear wife," he began in the count's
voice, "the thief is dead, but, after all, he is my godson, and has been more of a scapegrace than a villain. I will not put him to open
shame. Besides, I am sorry for the parents. I v^dll bury him myself
before daybreak, in the garden that the thing may not be known, so
give me the sheet, I will wrap up the body in it, and biury him as a
dog buries things by scratching." The countess gave him the sheet.
"I tell you what," continued the thief, "I have a fit of magnanimity on me; give me the ring too— the unhappy man risked his life for it,
so he may take it with him into his grave." She would not gainsay the count, and although she did it unwillingly she drew the ring
from her finger, and gave it to him. The thief made off with both
these things, and reached home safely before the count in the gar- den had finished his work of burying.
What a long face the count did pull when the master came next
morning, and brought him the sheet and the ring. "Are you a wizard?" said he, "who has fetched you out of the grave in which I
myself laid you, and brought you to life again?" "You did not bury
me," said the thief, "but the poor sinner on the gallows." And he told him exactly how everything had happened, and the count was
forced to own to him that he was a clever, crafty thief. "But you
have not reached the end yet," he added. "You still have to perform
the third task, and if you do not succeed in that, all is of no use." The master smiled and returned no answer.
When night had fallen he went with a long sack on his back, a
bundle under his arms, and a lantern in his hand to the village- church. In the sack he had some crabs, and in the bundle short
wax-candles. He sat down in the churchyard, took out a crab, and
stuck a wax-candle on his back. Then he lighted the little Hght, put
the crab on the ground, and let it creep about. He took a second
out of the sack, and treated it in the same way, and so on until the
last was out of the sack. Hereupon he put on a long black garment
that looked like a monk's cowl, and stuck a gray beard on his chin. When at last he was quite unrecognizable, he took the sack in
which the crabs had been, went into the church, and ascended the
pulpit. The clock in the tower was just striking twelve; when the
last stroke had sounded, he cried with a loud and piercing voice,
"Hearken, sinful men, the end of all things has comel The last day is at hand! HearkenI Hearken! Whosoever wishes to go to heaven
with me must creep into the sack. I am Peter, who opens and shuts
570 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
the gate of heaven. Behold how the dead outside there in the
churchyard, are wandering about collecting their bones. Come,
come, and creep into the sack; the world is about to be destroyed!" The cry echoed through the whole village. The parson and clerk
who Uved nearest to the church, heard it first, and when they saw
the Ughts which were moving about the churchyard, they observed
that something unusual was going on, and went into the church.
They Hstened to the sermon for a while, and then the clerk nudged
the parson and said, *lt would not be amiss if we were to use the opportunity together, and before the dawning of the last day, find
an easy way of getting to heaven." "To tell the truth," answered the
parson, "that is what I myself have been thinking, so if you are incHned, we will set out on our way." "Yes," answered the clerk, "but
you, the pastor, have the precedence, I will follow." So the parson went first, and ascended the pulpit where the master opened his
sack. The parson crept in first, and then the clerk.
The master immediately tied up the sack tightly, seized it by the
middle, and dragged it down the pulpit-steps, and whenever the
heads of the two fools bumped against the steps, he cried, "We are
going over the mountains." Then he drew them through the village in the same way, and when they were passing through puddles, he
cried, "Now we are going through wet clouds," and when at last he
was dragging them up the steps of the castle, he cried, "Now we
are on the steps of heaven, and will soon be in the outer court." When he had got to the top, he pushed the sack into the pigeonhouse, and when the pigeons fluttered about, he said, "Hark how
glad the angels are, and how they are flapping their wings!" Then he bolted the door upon them, and went away.
Next morning he went to the count, and told him that he had
performed the third task also, and had carried the parson and clerk
out of the church. "Where have you left them?" asked the lord.
"They are lying upstairs in a sack in the pigeon-house, and imagine
that they are in heaven." The count went up himself, and con- vinced himself that the master had told the truth. When he had
delivered the parson and clerk from their captivity, he said, 'Tou are an arch-thief, and you have won the wager. For once you es- cape with a whole skin, but leave my land; for if you ever set foot
on it again, you may count on your elevation to the gallows." The ai'ch-thief took leave of his parents, once more went forth into the wide world, and no one has ever heard of him since.
The Three Brothers
There was once a man who had three sons, and nothing else in the world but the house in which he lived. Now each of the sons
wished to have the house after his father's death; but the father loved them all alike, and did not know what to do; he did not wish
to sell the house, because it had belonged to his forefathers, else he
might have divided the money among them. At last a plan came
into his head, and he said to his sons, "Go into the world, and try each of you to learn a trade, and, when you all come back, he who
makes the best masterpiece shall have the house." The sons were satisfied with this; and the eldest determined to be
a blacksmith, the second a barber, and the third a fencing-master.
They fixed a time when they should all come home again, and then
each went his way.
It chanced that they all found skUful masters, who taught them
their trades well. The blacksmith had to shoe the Eling's horses, and
he thought to himself, "The house is mine, without doubt." The barber only shaved great people, and he too already looked upon
the house as his own. The fencing-master got many a blow, but he
only bit his lip, and let nothing vex him; "for," said he to himself,
"if you are afraid of a blow, you'll never win the house." When the appointed time had gone by, the three brothers came
back home to their father; but they did not know how to find the
best opportunity for showing their skill, so they sat down and consulted together. As they were sitting thus, all at once a hare came
running across the field. "Ah, ha, just in timel" said the barber. So he took his basin and soap, and lathered away until the hare came
up; then he soaped and shaved oflE the hare's whiskers while he was running at the top of his speed, and did not even cut his skin or injure a hair on his body. "Well donel" said the old man, "your brothers will have to exert themselves wonderfully, or the house
will be yours." Soon after, up came a nobleman in his coach, dashing along at
full speed. "Now you shall see what I can do, father," said the blacksmith; so away he ran after the coach, took all four shoes off
the feet of one of the horses while he was galloping, and put on
him four new shoes without stopping him. "You are a fine feUow,
572 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
and as clever as your brother," said his father; "I do not know to
which I ought to give the house."
Then the third son said, "Father, let me have my turn, if you
please"; and, as it was beginning to rain, he drew his sword, and flourished it backwards and forwards about his head so fast that
not a drop fell upon him. It rained still harder and harder, till at
last it came down in torrents; but he only flourished his sword
faster and faster, and remained as dry as if he were sitting in a
house. When his father saw this he was amazed, and said, "This is
the masterpiece, the house is yoiu*sl" His brothers were satisfied with this, as was agreed beforehand;
and, as they loved one another very much, they all three stayed together in the house, followed their trades, and, as they had learnt
them so well and were so clever, they earned a great deal of
money. Thus they fived together happily until they grew old; and
at last, when one of them fell sick and died, the two others grieved
so sorely about it that they also fell ill, and soon after died. And because they had been so clever, and had loved one another so much,
they were all laid in the same grave.
The Four Skilful Brothers
There was once a poor man who had four sons, and when they
were grown up, he said to them, "My dear children, you must now go out into the world, for I have nothing to give you, so set out, and
go to some distance and learn a trade, and see how you can make
your way." So the four brothers took their sticks, bade their father farewell, and went through the town-gate together. When they had
traveled about for some time, they came to a cross-way which branched off in four different directions. Then said the eldest,
"Here we must separate, but on this day in four years, we will meet each other again at this spot, and in the meantime we will seek our
fortunes." Then each of them went his way, and the eldest met a man who
asked him where he was going, and what he was intending to do.
*T want to learn a trade," he replied. Then the other said, "Come
with me, and be a thief." "No," he answered, "that is no longer regarded as a reputable trade, and the end of it is that one has to
The Four Skilful Brothers 573
swing on the gallows." "Oh," said the man, "you need not be afraid of the gallows; I will only teach you to get such things as no other
man could ever lay hold of, and no one will ever detect you." So he allowed himself to be talked into it, and while with the man became an accomplished thief, and so dexterous that nothing was safe from him if he once desired to have it.
The second brother met a man who put the same question to him
—what he wanted to learn in the world. "I don't know yet," he
repUed. "Then come with me, and be an astronomer; there is nothing better than that, for nothing is hid from you." He liked the idea, and became such a skilful astronomer that when he had learnt everything, and was about to travel onwards, his master gave him a
telescope and said to him, "With that you can see whatsoever takes place either on earth or in heaven, and nothing can remain concealed from you." A huntsman took the third brother into training, and gave him
such excellent instruction in everything which related to huntsmanship, that he became an experienced hunter. When he went
away, his master gave him a gun and said, "It will never fail you;
whatsoever you aim at, you are certain to hit." The youngest brother also met a man who spoke to him, and
inquired what his intentions were. "Would you not like to be a tailor?" said he. "Not that I know of," said the youth; "sitting doubled up from morning till night, driving the needle and the goose backwards and forwards, is not to my taste." "Oh, but you are speaking
in ignorance," answered the man; "with me you would learn a very different kind of tailoriag, which is respectable and proper, and for
the most part very honorable." So he let himself be persuaded, and went with the man, and learnt his art from the very begiiming.
When they parted, the man gave the youth a needle, and said,
"With this you can sew together whatever is given you, whether it is as soft as an egg or as hard as steel; and it will all become one
piece of stuff, so that no seam will be visible." When the appointed four years were over, the four brothers arrived at the same time at the cross-roads, embraced and kissed each
other, and returned home to their father. "So now," said he, quite
delighted, "the wind has blown you back again to me." They told him of all that had happened to them, and that each had learnt his
own trade. Now they were sitting just in front of the house under a
large tree, and the father said, "I will put you all to the test, and
see what you can do."
Then he looked up and said to his second son, "Between two
574 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
branches up at the top of this tree, there is a chafiBnch's nest, tell
me how many eggs there are in it." The astronomer took his glass,
looked up, and said, "There are five." Then the father said to the
eldest, "Fetch the eggs down without disturbing the bird which is
sitting hatching them." The skilful thief climbed up and took the five eggs from beneath the bird, which never observed what he was
doing, and remained quietly sitting where she was, and brought
them down to his father. The father took them, and put one of
them on each comer of the table, and the fifth in the middle, and
said to the huntsman, "With one shot you shall shoot me the five
eggs in two, through the middle." The himtsman aimed, and shot the eggs, all five as the father had desired, and that at one shot. He
certainly must have had some of the powder for shooting round
comers. "Now it's yoiu: turn," said the father to the fourth son;
"you shall sew the eggs together again, and the young birds that are inside them as well, and you must do it so that they are not hurt
by the shot." The tailor brought his needle, and sewed them as his father wished. When he had done this the thief had to climb up the
tree again, and carry them to the nest, and put them back again
under the bird without her being aware of it. The bird sat her full
time, and after a few days the young ones crept out, and they had a
red line round their necks where they had been sewn together by the tailor.
"Well," said the old man to his sons, "I begin to think you are worth more than green clover; you have used your time well, and
learnt something good. I can't say which of you deserves the most praise. That will be proved if you have but an early opportunity of
using your talents." Not long after this, there was a great uproar in the country, for
the King's daughter was carried off by a dragon. The King was full of trouble about it, both by day and night, and caused it to be
proclaimed that whosoever brought her back should have her to
wife. The four brothers said to each other, "This would be a fine
opportunity for us to show what we can do!" and resolved to go
forth together and liberate the King's daughter. "I will soon know
where she is," said the astronomer, and looked through his telescope and said, "I see her already, she is far away from here on a
rock in the sea, and the dragon is beside her watching her." Then he went to the King, and asked for a ship for himself and
his brothers, and sailed with them over the sea until they came to
the rock. There the King's daughter was sitting and the dragon was
lying asleep on her lap. The huntsman said, "I dare not fire, I
The Four Skilful Brothers 575
should kill the beautiful maiden at the same time." "Then I will try
my art," said the thief, and he crept thither and stole her away from under the dragon, so quietly and dexterously, that the monster
never remarked it, but went on snoring. Full of joy, they hurried oflE
with her on board ship, and steered out into the open sea; but the
dragon, who when he awoke had found no Princess there, followed
them, and came snorting angrily through the air. Just as he was circling above the ship, and about to descend on it, the huntsman
shouldered his gun, and shot him to the heart. The monster fell
down dead, but was so large and powerful that his fall shattered
the whole ship. Fortunately, however, they laid hold of a couple of
planks, and swam about the wide sea. Then again they were in
great peril, but the tailor, who was not idle, took his wondrous
needle, and with a few stitches sewed the planks together, and they
seated themselves upon them, and collected together all the frag- ments of the vessel. Then he sewed these so skilfully together, that
in a very short time the ship was once more seaworthy, and they
could go home again in safety.
When the King once more saw his daughter, there were great rejoicings. He said to the four brothers, "One of you shall have her to wife, but which of you it is to be you must settle among yourselves." Then a warm contest arose among them, for each of them
preferred his own claim. The astronomer said, "If I had not seen
the Princess, all your arts would have been useless, so she is mine."
The thief said, "What would have been the use of your seeing, if I
had not got her away from the dragon? So she is mine." The huntsman said, "You and the Princess, and all of you, would have been torn to pieces by the dragon if my ball had not hit him, so she is
mine." The tailor said, "And if I, by my art, had not sewn the ship together again, you would all of you have been miserably drowned,
so she is mine." Then the King uttered this saying, "Each of you has an equal right, and as all of you cannot have the maiden, none
of you shall have her, but I will give to each of you, as a reward,
half a kingdom." The brothers were pleased with this decision, and
said, 'It is better thus than that we should be at variance with each
other." Then each of them received half a kingdom, and they Hved with their father in the greatest happiness as long as it pleased God.
Tales of Snakes
1
There was once a little child whose mother gave her every after- noon a small bowl of milk and bread, and the child seated herself
in the yard with it. When she began to eat, however, a snake came
creeping out of a crevice in the wall, dipped its little head in the
dish, and ate with her. The child had pleasure in this, and when
she was sitting there with her little dish and the snake did not come
at once, she cried,
"Snake, snake, come swiftly. Hither come, thou tiny thing.
Thou shalt have thy crumbs of bread.
Thou shalt refresh thyself with milk." Then the snake came in haste, and enjoyed its food. Moreover it
showed gratitude, for it brought the child all Idnds of pretty things
from its hidden treasures, bright stones, pearls, and gold playthings.
The snake, however, only drank the milk, and left the breadcrxmibs alone. Then one day the child took its little spoon and
struck the snake gently on its head with it, and said, "Eat the
bread-crumbs as well, little thing." The mother, who was standing in the kitchen, heard the child talking to some one, and when she
saw that she was striking a snake with her spoon, ran out with a log
of wood, and killed the good little creature.
From that time forth, a change came over the child. As long as
the snake had eaten with her, she had grown tall and strong, but
now she lost her pretty rosy cheeks and wasted away. It was not
long before the funeral bird began to cry in the night, and the
redbreast to collect little branches and leaves for a fvmeral garland,
and soon afterwards the child lay on her bier.
11
A SNAKE cries "Huhu, huhu." A child says, "Come out." The snake
comes out, then the child inquires about her Httle sister: "Hast thou
The Turnip 577
not seen Kttle Red-stocldngs?" The snake says, "No." "Neither have
I." "Then I am like you. Huhu, huhu, huhu."
Ill
An orphan child was sitting on the town walls spinning, when she
saw a snake coming out of a hole low down in the wall. Swiftly she
spread out beside this one of the blue silk handkerchiefs which
snakes have such a strong liking for, and which are the only things
they will creep on. As soon as the snake saw it, it went back, then
retiuTied, bringing viith it a small golden crown, laid it on the
handkerchief, and then went away again. The girl took up the
crown; it glittered and was of delicate golden filagree work. It was
not long before the snake came back for the second time, but when
it no longer saw the crown, it crept up to the wall, and in its grief
smote its little head against it as long as it had strength to do so,
until at last it lay there dead. If the girl had but left the crown
where it was, the snake would certainly have brought still more of
its treasiu"es out of the hole.
The Turnip
There were once two brothers who both served as soldiers; one of
them was rich, and the other poor. The poor one, to escape from his
poverty, put off his soldiers coat and turned farmer. He dug and
hoed his bit of land, and sowed it with turnip-seed. The seed came
up, and one turnip grew there which became large and vigorous,
and visibly grew bigger and bigger, and seemed as if it would
never stop growing, so that it might have been called the princess
of turnips, for never was such an one seen before, and never will
such an one be seen again.
It finally became so enormous that it filled a whole cart, and two
oxen were required to draw it, and the farmer had not the least
idea what he was to do with the turnip, or whether it would be a
fortune to him or a misfoitune. At last he thought, "If I sell it, what will I get for it; and if I eat it myself, why the small turnips would
578 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
taste just as good. It would be better to take it to the King, and
make him a present of it." So he placed it on a cart, harnessed two oxen, took it to the palace, and presented it to the King. "What strange thing is this?" said
the King. "Many wonderful things have come before my eyes, but never such a monster as this! From what seed can this have sprung,
or are you a luck-child and have met -with it by chance?" "Ah, no!"
said the farmer, "no luck-child am I. I am a poor soldier, who because he could no longer support himself hung his soldier's coat on a nail and took to farming land. I have a brother who is rich and
well known to you, Lord King, but I, because I have nothing, am
forgotten by every one."
Then the King felt compassion for him, and said, "You shall be raised from poverty, and shall have such gifts from me that you
shall be equal to your rich brother." Then he bestowed on him much gold, and lands, and meadows, and herds, and made him immensely rich, so that the wealth of the other brother could not be
compared with his. Wben the rich brother heard what the poor one
had gained for himself with one single turnip, he envied him, and
thought in every way how he also could get hold of a similar piece
of luck. He would, however, set about it in a much wiser way, and
took gold and horses and carried them to the King, and made certain the King would give him a much larger present in return. If his
brother had got so much for one turnip, what would he not carry
away with him in return for such beautiful things as these? The
King accepted his present, and said he had nothing to give him in
return that was more rare and excellent than the great turnip.
So the rich man was obliged to put his brother's turnip in a cart and have it taken to his home. When there he did not know on
whom to vent his rage and anger, until bad thoughts came to him,
and he resolved to IdU his brother. He hired murderers, who were
to lie in ambush, and then he went to his brother and said, "Dear brother, I know of a hidden treasure, we will dig it up together,
and divide it between us." The other agreed to this, and accompa- nied him without suspicion. While they were on their way, however, the miu'derers fell on him, bound him, and would have hanged him to a tree. But just as they were doing this, loud singing
and the sound of a horse's feet were heard in the distance. On this their hearts were filled with terror, and they pushed their prisoner
head first into the sack, hung it on a branch, and took to flight. He,
however, worked up there until he had made a hole in the sack
through which he could put his head.
The Turnip 579
The man who was coming by was no other than a traveling student, a young fellow who rode on his way through the wood
joyously singing his song. When he who was aloft saw that some
one was passing below him, he cried, "Good day! You have come at
a lucky time." The student looked round on every side, but did not
know whence the voice came. At last he said, "Who calls me?"
Then an answer came from the top of the tree, "Raise your eyes; here I sit aloft in the Sack of Wisdom. In a short time have I learnt
great things. Compared with this all schools are a jest; in a very
short time I shall have learned everything, and shall descend wiser
than all other men. I understand the stars, and the signs of the zodiac, and the tracks of the winds, the sand of the sea, the heaHng of
illness, and the virtues of all herbs, birds, and stones. If you were
once within it you would feel what noble things issue forth from
the Sack of Knowledge." The student, when he heard all this, was astonished, and said,
"Blessed be the hour in which I have found youl May not I also
enter the sack for a while?" He who was above replied as if unwillingly, "For a short time I will let you get into it, if you reward
me and give me good words; but you must wait an horn- longer, for
one thing remains which I must learn before I do it." When the stu- dent had waited a while he became impatient, and begged to be allowed to get in at once, his thirst for knowledge was so very great.
So he who was above pretended at last to yield, and said, "In order that I may come forth from the house of knowledge you must let it
down by the rope, and then you shall enter it." So the student let the sack down, untied it, and set him free, and
then cried, "Now draw me up at once," and was about to get into
the sack. "Halt!" said the other, "that won't do," and took him by the head and put him upside down into the sack, fastened it, and
drew the disciple of wisdom up the tree by the rope. Then he
swung him in the air and said, "How goes it with you, my dear fellow? Behold, already you feel wisdom coming, and are gaining
valuable experience. Keep perfectly quiet until you become wiser."
Thereupon he mounted the student's horse and rode away, but in
an hour's time sent some one to let the student out again.
The Twelve Huntsmen
Thebe was once a King's son who was betrothed to a maiden, and he loved his bride very much. One day, as they were sitting very
happily together, there came information that his father lay ill and
dying, and wished to see him for the last time before his death. "I
must go and leave you, darhng," said the King's son, "and directly too, for I have a long journey to take; but I will give you this ring
as a memory token, and when I am King I will come and fetch you
home." Then he rode away, and when he reached the castle he found his
father dying and his end very near. But he was able to speak, and
said, "Dearest son, I have sent for you because I want you to promise to do as I wish about your marriage."
And then he named to him a King's daughter who was well known, and asked him to take her as his wife. The son was so sad at
these words that he hardly knew at first what to say; still, he could
not refuse his dying father, so he replied, "Dear father, whatever
your will is shall be done." Then the King closed his eyes and died. As soon as the son became King, and the mourning was over, he remembered that he
must keep the promise which he had given to his father. He sent,
therefore, to the King's daughter, and as she was willing to be his bride they were betrothed to each other.
The first bride very soon heard of what he had done, and she
grieved so bitterly over her lover's unfaithfulness that her life seemed passing away. At last her father, who was also a King, said
to her, "Dearest child, why are you so sad? If anything you wish
can be done, I will do it for you."
She roused herself in a moment, and said, "Dear father, I should so like to have as companions eleven maidens exactly like myself in
countenance, shape, and size."
Her father replied: "As soon as possible your wish shall be
fulfilled." He sent messengers all over the kingdom, who were ordered to
find eleven maidens who should resemble his daughter in face,
figure, and size; and after a long time they succeeded, and brought
them to the King's daughter.
The Twelve Huntsmen 581
As soon as they arrived she ordered twelve hunting dresses to be
made exactly alike, and when they were finished, each of the eleven
maidens put one on, and she did the same. Then she bade her father farewell and rode away to the castle of her former bridegroom,
whom she still loved. On arriving she sent a message to the King,
saying she was the chief of twelve young himtsmen who wished to
be taken into the King's service.
He came out to see them, but in the huntsman's dress he did not recognize his former bride; but he was so pleased with their appearance that he said he should like them to serve him very much,
and so they all became the king's huntsmen. But the King had a lion who was a wonderful animal, for he
found out every concealment or secret.
So it happened one evening that he said to the King, "You think
that you have engaged twelve young himtsmen to serve you."
"Yes," said the King, "I have engaged twelve huntsmen." "You are
mistaken," replied the lion; "they are maidens, not huntsmen."
"Well," said the King, "that cannot be true; or, if it is, how can you
prove it?" "Oh, easily," said the Hon; "strew peas in the ante- chamber, and you wiU soon see. A man has a firm step; he will either crush the peas or pass over them without moving them; but
maidens will come tripping or shuflfling along, and set the peas
rolling." The King was very much pleased with this advice, and ordered
the room to be strewn with peas.
But one of the King's own servants was Idnd-hearted, and as he
overheard the lion's advice, he went at once and told the young huntsmen how they were to be put to the proof, and said also,
*The hon wants the King to believe that you are women."
The King's daughter thanked him, and when she spoke afterward
to the maidens about it, she said, "Remember to step strongly and
with a firm foot on the peas." The next morning the King sent for the twelve huntsmen, and
met them in the antechamber; but as they passed through where
the peas lay they stepped upon them so heavily, and had such a
firm, strong walk, that not a single pea rolled or even moved.
After they were gone the King said to the lion, "You have spoken
falsely to me; they walk like men." "Yes," answered the lion; "they knew that the peas were put there to prove them, so they exerted
all their strength; but now give them another trial; have twelve
spinning-wheels placed in the anteroom, and when they see them
582 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
they will look quite delighted, whereas no man would notice them." The King was pleased with this advice also, and gave orders for
twelve spinning-wheels to be placed lq the anteroom.
The servant, however, who reaUy believed in the truthfulness of
the young huntsmen, disclosed the plan to them. When they were
alone the King's daughter cautioned them not even to glance at the spinning-wheels, and to walk firmly.
The next morning the King sent for his twelve huntsmen; but as
they passed through the anteroom with a firm step not one of them
took the slightest notice of the spinning-wheels.
"Wrong again, lion," said the King; "they must be men, for they
did not even see the spinning-wheels." "Because," answered the
lion, "they knew that you were trying them with another test." But after this the King would not believe the Hon.
The twelve huntsmen generally followed or accompanied the
King when he went hunting, and the more he knew of them the more he liked them.
It happened one day while they were out himting that information was brought of the approach of the King's bride. As soon as
the chief huntsman— who really was the King's first bride, and rode near him— heard the news, such a pang of grief came upon her that
her heart seemed to stop, and she fell oflF her horse to the groimd
insensible. The King, who supposed that his favorite huntsman had
met with an accident, ran to help him; and raising him up, his
glove fell ofiE. Then the King saw with smprise that he wore on his
finger a ring which he had given to his first bride, and looking
earnestly in the face, he recognized her. Then was his heart so completely at rest that he kissed her, and as she opened her eyes he exclaimed, **You are mine, and I am yours, and no one in the world
shall separate us again." To his other bride he sent a messenger to say that he had a wife
aheady whom he had chosen before he knew her, and that he
prayed her to return to her own country.
Soon after the marriage was celebrated, and the Hon taken into
favor; for, after aU, he had spoken the truth.
The Maid of Brakel
A GIRL from Brakel once went to St. Anne's Chapel at the foot of the Hinnenberg, and as she wanted to have a husband, and thought
there was no one else in the chapel, she sang,
"Oh, holy Saint Anne! Help me soon to a man.
Thou know'st him right well. By Suttmer gate does he dwell.
His hair it is golden.
Thou know'st him right vyell."
The clerk, however, was standing behind the altar and heard
that, so he cried in a very gruff voice, "Thou shalt not have him!
Thou shalt not have him!" The girl thought that the child Mary who stood by her mother,
Aime, had called out that to her. She became angry and cried,
"Hush, you conceited thing. Hold your tongue, and let your mother
speak!"
Going Traveling
There was once a poor woman who had a son, who much v^dshed
to travel, but his mother said, "How canst thou travel? We have no
money for thee to take away with thee." Then said the son, "I will manage very well for myself. I will always say. Not much, not
much, not much."
So he walked for a long time and always said, "Not much, not
much, not much." Then he passed by a company of fishermen and
said, "God speed you! not much, not much, not much." "What
sayst thou, churl, 'not much?'" And when the net was drawn out they had not caught much fish. So one of them fell on the youth
with a stick and said, "Hast thou never seen me threshing?" "What
ought I to say, then?" asked the youth. "Thou must say, 'Get it full,
get it full.'"
584 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
After this he again walked a long time, and said, "Get it full, get
it full," until he came to the gallows, where they had got a poor sinner whom they were about to hang. Then said he, "Good morning;
get it full, get it full." "What sayst thou, knave, 'get it full'? Dost thou want to make out that there are still more wicked people in
the world— is not this enough?" And he again got some blows on his
back. "What am I to say, then?" said he. "Thou must say, 'may God
have pity on the poor soul.' "
Again the youth walked on for a long while and said, "May God
have pity on the poor soul!" Then he came to a pit by which stood
a knacker who was cutting up a horse. The youth said, "Good
morning; God have pity on the poor soull" "What dost thou say,
thou ill-tempered knave?" And the knacker gave him such a box on
the ear, that he could not see out of his eyes. "What am I to say,
then?" "Thou must say, 'There lies the carrion in the piti' "
So he walked on, and always said, "There lies the carrion in the
pit, there lies the carrion in the pit." And he came to a cart full of
people, so he said, "Good morning, there lies the carrion in the pit!" Then the cart pushed him into a hole, and the driver took his whip
and cracked it upon the youth, till he was forced to crawl back to
his mother, and as long as he lived he never went traveling again.
Knoist and His Three Sons
Between Werrel and Soist there lived a man whose name was
Knoist, and he had three sons. One was bHnd, the other lame, and
the third stark-naked. Once on a time they went into a field, and
there they saw a hare. The bHnd one shot it, the lame one caught it,
the naked one put it in his pocket. Then they came to a mighty big
lake, on which there were three boats; one sailed, one sank, the
third had no bottom to it. They all three got into the one with no
bottom to it. Then they came to a mighty big forest in which there
was a mighty big tree; in the tree was a mighty big chapel; in the
chapel was a sexton made of beech-wood and a box-wood parson,
who dealt out holy-water with cudgels.
'How truly happy is that one Who can from holy water runH
The Story of SchlauraflFen Land
In the time of Schlauraffen* I went there, and saw Rome and the Lateran hanging by a small silken thread, and a man without feet
who outran a swift horse, and a keen sharp sword that cut through
a bridge. There I saw a young ass with a silver nose which pursued
two fleet hares, and a Hme tree that was very large, on which hot
cakes were growing. There I saw a lean old goat which carried
about a hundred cart-loads of fat on his body, and sixty loads of
salt. Have I not told enough hes?
There I saw a plough ploughing without horse or cow; and a
child of one year threw four miUstones from Ratisbon to Treves,
and from Treves to Strasburg; and a hawk swam over the Rhine,
which he had a perfect right to do. There I heard some fishes begin
to make such a disturbance with each other, that it resoimded as
far as Heaven; and sweet honey flowed like water from a deep valley at the top of a high mountain, and these were strange things.
There were two crows which were mowing a meadow; and I saw
two gnats building a bridge, and two doves tore a wolf to pieces;
two children brought forth two kids; and two frogs threshed com
together. There I saw two mice consecrating a bishop, and two cats
scratching out a bear's tongue. Then a snail came rurming up and killed two furious Hons. There stood a barber and shaved a
woman's beard ofiF; and two sucldng-children bade their mother hold her tongue. There I saw two greyhounds which brought a mill
out of the water; and a sorry old horse was beside it, and said it
was right. And four horses were standing in the yard threshing com
with all their might, and two goats were heating the stove, and a red cow shot the bread into the oven.
Then a cock crowed, Cock-a-doodle-doo! The story is all told— Cock-a-doodle-doo 1
* A legendary fantastic region, similar to the fabulous Cockaigne, land of luxury and idleness.
The Ditmarsch Tale of Wonders
I WELL TELL you Something. I saw two roasted fowls flying; they
flew quickly and had their breasts turned to Heaven and their
backs to Hell; and an anvil and a mill-stone swam across the Rhine
prettily, slowly, and gently; and a frog sat on the ice at Whitsuntide
and ate a ploughshare.
Four fellows who wanted to catch a hare, went on crutches and
stilts; one of them was deaf, the second bHnd, the third dumb, and
the fourth could not stir a step. Do you want to know how it was
done? First, the blind man saw the hare running across the field,
the dumb one called to the deaf one, and the lame one seized it by the neck.
There were certain men who wished to sail on dry land, and they
set their sails in the wind, and sailed away over great fields. Then
they sailed over a high mountain, and there they were miserably drowned.
A crab was chasing a hare which was running away at full speed;
and high up on the roof lay a cow which had climbed up there. In
that country the flies are as big as the goats are here.
Open the vmidow that the Hes may fly out.
Domestic Servants
"Whither goest thou?" "To Walpe." '1 to Walpe, thou to Walpe; so,
so, together we'll go."
"Hast thou a man? What is his name?" "Cham." "My man Cham, thy man Cham; I to Walpe, thou to Walpe; so, so, together
we'll go."
"Hast thou a child; how is he styled?" "Wild." "My child Wild, thy child Wild; my man Cham, thy man Cham; I to Walpe, thou to
Walpe; so, so, together we'U go."
"Hast thou a cradle? How callest thou thy cradle?" "Hippodadle." "My cradle Hippodadle, thy cradle Hippodadle; my child
The Rogue and His Master 587
Wild, thy child Wild; my man Cham, thy man Cham; I to Walpe,
thou to Walpe; so, so, together we'll go."
"Hast thou also a drudge? What name has thy drudge?"
"From-thy-work-do-not-budge." "My drudge, From-thy-work-do- not-budge, thy drudge, From-thy-work-do-not-budge; my cradle Hippodadle, thy aadle Hippodadle; my child Wild, thy child Wild;
my man Cham, thy man Cham; I to Walpe, thou to Walpe; so, so, together we'll go."
The Rogue and His Master
A MAN NAMED John greatly desired that his son should learn some
trade, and he went into the church to ask the priest's opinion what would be most desirable. Just then the clerk was standing near the
altar, and he cried out, "The rogue, the rogue!" At these words the man went away, and told his son he must learn to be a rogue, for so
the priest had said. So they set out, and asked one man after another whether he was a rogue, till, at the end of the day, they en- tered a large forest, and there found a little hut with an old woman in it.
John asked the old woman, "Do you know any man who can
teach roguery?" "Here," said the old woman, "here you may learn,
for my son is a master of the art." Then John asked the son whether
he could teach it perfectly, and the rogue replied, "I will teach your son well; return in four years, and if you know your son then I
will not ask any recompense; but if you do not, then you must give
me two hundred dollars." John now went home, and left his son to learn roguery and
witchcraft. When the time was up, the father set out to see his son,
considering as he went along by what he should know him. On his
way he met a little man, who stopped him, and asked, "Why are
you grieving and looking so mournful?" "Oh," replied John, "four years ago I left my son to learn roguery, and the master said if I re- turned in that time and knew my son, I should have nothing to pay;
but if I did not know him, I must give him two hundred dollars;
and, since I have no means of recognizing him, I am troubled
where to procure the money." Then the little man told him to take a basket of bread with him.
588 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
and when he came to the rogue's house to put the basket under a hollow tree which stood there, and the Httle bird which should
peep out would be his son.
John went and did as he was told, and out came a Httle bird to
peck at the bread. "Holloa, my sonl Are you here?" said John. The
son was very glad to hear his father's voice, and said, "Father, let
us gol" But first the rogue-master called out, "The Evil One must
have told you where to find your son!" So the father and son returned home, and on their way they met
a coach, and the son said to his father, "I wiU change myself into a
fine greyhound, and then you can earn some money by me."
The lord who was riding in the coach called out, "Man, will you
sell your dog?" "Yes," replied the father. "How much do you want
for him?" "Thirty dollars," was the reply. "That is too much, my
man," said the lord, "but on account of his very beautiful skin I wiU
buy him of you." The bargain concluded, the dog was put inside the coach; but
when they had traveled a mile or two the greyhoimd jumped right
out through the glass, and rejoined his father.
After this adventure they went home together, and the following
day they went to the next village to market. On their way the son
said, "Father, I will change myself into a horse, and then you can sell me; but first untie my bridle, and then I can change myself into
the form of a man." The father drove his horse to market, and thither came the
rogue-master and bought him for a hundred dollars, but the father
forgot to untie the bridle.
The rogue rode his horse home, and put him in the stable, and,
when the maid came with the com, the horse said to her, "Undo
my bridle, undo my bridlel" "Ah, can you speak?" said she, terrified, and untied the horse directly. The horse thereupon became a sparrow, and flew away out at the door, pursued by the
rogue, who changed himself also into a bird. When they came up
with each other, the rogue changed himself into water, and the
other into a fish. But the rogue could not catch him so, and he
changed himself into a cock, but the other instantly became a fox,
and bit his master's head off, so that he died. And he Hes there to this very day.
The Wise Servant
How FORTUNATE is the master, and how well all goes in his house,
when he has a wise servant who listens to his orders and does not
obey them, but prefers following his own wisdom.
A clever John of this kind was once sent out by his master to seek
a lost cow. He stayed away a long time, and the master thought,
"Faithful John does not spare any pains over his work!" As, how- ever, he did not come back at all, the master was afraid lest some
misfortune had befallen him, and set out himself to look for him.
He had to search a long time, but at last he perceived the boy who
was nmning up and down a large field. "Now, dear John," said the
master when he had got up to him, "have you foimd the cow which
I sent you to seek?" "No, master," he answered, "I have not found
the cow, but then I have not looked for it." "Then what have you
looked for, John?" "Something better, and that luckily I have
found." "What is that, John?" "Three blackbirds," answered the
boy. "And where are they?" asked the master. "I see one of them, I
hear the other, and I am running after the third," answered the wise boy.
Take example by this; do not trouble yourselves about your
masters or their orders, but rather do what comes into your head
and pleases you, and then you will act just as wisely as prudent
Johnl
The Seven Swabians
Seven Swabians once held a meeting. The first \^ ;s Master Schulz;
the second, Jackli; the third, Marh; the fourth, JergH; the fifth,
Michal; the sixth, Hans; the seventh, Veitli. All sev^ a had made up
their minds to travel about the world to seek advci: ures, and perform great deeds. But in order that they might go in security and
with arms in their hands, they thought it would be .advisable that
they should have one very strong and very long spe.u- made for
590 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
them. This spear all seven of them took in their hands at once. In
front walked the boldest and bravest, and that was Master Schulz;
all the others followed in a row, and Veitli was the last.
It came to pass one day in the hay-making month, when they had
walked a long distance, and still had a long way to go before they
reached the village where they were to pass the night, that as they
were in a meadow in the twilight a great beetle or hornet flew by
them from behind a bush, and hummed in a menacing manner.
Master Schulz was so terrified that he all but dropped the spear,
and a cold perspiration broke out over his whole body. "Hark!
hark!" cried he to his comrades, "good heavens! I hear a drum." Jackh, who was behind him holding the spear, and who perceived
some kind of a smell, said, "Something is most certainly going on,
for I taste powder and matches." At these words Master Schulz began to take to flight, and in a
trice jumped over a hedge, but as he just happened to jump on to the
teeth of a rake which had been left lying there after the hay-making,
the handle of it struck against his face and gave him a tremendous
blow. "Oh dear! Oh dear!" screamed Master Schulz. "Take me prisoner; I surrender! I surrender!" The other six all leapt over, one on
the top of the other, crying, "If you surrender, I surrender too! If
you surrender, I surrender too!" At length, as no enemy was there to bind and take them away, they saw that they had been mistaken,
and in order that the story might not be known, and they be treated
as fools and ridiculed, they all swore to each other to hold their
peace about it until one of them accidentally spoke of it.
Then they journeyed onwards. The second danger which they
survived cannot be compared with the first. Some days afterwards,
their path led them through a fallow-field where a hare was sitting
sleeping in the sun. Her ears were standing straight up, and her
great glassy eyes were wide open. All of them were alarmed at the
sight of the horrible wild beast, and they consulted together as to
what would be the least dangerous thing to do. For if they were to
run, they knew that the monster would pursue and swallow them
whole. So they said, "We must go through a great and dangerous
struggle. Boldly ventured, is half won," and all seven grasped the spear. Master Schulz in front, and Veitli behind. Master Schulz was
always trying to keep the spear back, but Veitli had become quite
brave while behind, and wanted to dash forward and cried,
"Strike home, in every Swabian's name.
Or else I wish ye may he lame."
The Seven Swabians 591
But Hans knew how to meet this, and said,
"Thunder and lightning, it's fine to prate.
But for dragon-hunting thou'rt aye too late."
Michal cried,
"Nothing is wanting, not even a hair.
Be sure the Devil himself is there."
Then it was Jergli's turn to speak,
"If it he not, it's at least his mother.
Or else it's the Devils own step-brother."
And now Marli had a bright thought, and said to Veitli,
"Advance, Veitli, advance, advance.
And I behind will hold the lance."
Veitli, however, did not attend to that, and Jackli said,
"'Tis Schulz's place the first to be. No one deserves that honor but he."
Then Master Schulz plucked up his courage, and said, gravely,
"Then let us boldly advance to the fight.
And thus we shall show our valor and might."
Hereupon they all together set on the dragon. Master Schulz
crossed himself and prayed for God's assistance, but as all this was of no avail, and he was getting nearer and nearer to the enemy, he
screamed, "Ohol Ohol hoi hoi hoi" in the greatest anguish. This awakened the hare, which in great alarm darted swiftly away.
When Master Schuly saw her thus flying from the field of battle, he
cried in his joy,
"Quick, Veitli, quick, look there, look there.
The monsters nothing but a hare!"
But the Swabian allies went in search of further adventures,
and came to the Moselle, a mossy, quiet, deep river, over which
there are few bridges, and which in many places people have to
cross in boats. As the seven Swabians did not know this, they called
to a man who was working on the opposite side of the river, to
know how people contrived to get across. The distance and their
way of speaking made the man unable to understand what they
wanted, and he said, "What? what?" in the way people speak in the neighborhood of Treves. Master Schulz thought he was saying.
592 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
"Wade, wade through the water," and as he was the first, began to set out and went into the Moselle.
It was not long before he sank in the mud and the deep waves
which drove against him, but his hat was blown on the opposite
shore by the wind, and a frog sat down beside it, and croaked
"Wat, wat, wat." The other six on the opposite side heard that, and
said, "Oho, comrades. Master Schulz is calling us; if he can wade
across, why cannot we?" So they all jumped into the water together in a great hurry, and were drowned, and thus one frog took the
lives of all six of them, and not one of the Swabian allies ever
reached home again.
Lean Lisa
Lean Lisa was of a very different way of thinking from lazy Harry
and fat Trina, who never let anything disturb their peace. She
scoured everything with ashes, from morning till evening, and bur- dened her husband. Long Laurence, with so much work that he
had heavier weights to carry than an ass with three sacks. It was,
however, all to no purpose; they had nothing and came to nothing.
One night as she lay in bed, and could hardly move one limb for
weariness, she still did not allow her thoughts to go to sleep. She
thrust her elbows into her husband's side, and said, "Listen Lenz, to what I have been thinking: if I were to find one florin and one
was given to me, I would borrow another to put to them, and you
too should give me another, and then as soon as I had got the four
florins together, I would buy a young cow."
This pleased the husband right well. 'It is true," said he, "that I do not know where I am to get the florin which you want as a gift
from me; but, if you can get the money together, and can buy a
cow with it, you will do well to carry out your project. I shall be
glad," he added, "if the cow has a calf, and then I shall often get a
drink of milk to refresh me." "The milk is not for you," said the
woman; "we must let the calf suck that it may become big and fat,
and we may be able to sell it well." "Certainly," replied the man,
"but still we will take a little milk; that will do no harm." "Who has
taught you to manage cows?" said the woman; "whether it does harm or not, I will not allow it, and even if you were to stand on
Godfather Death 593
your head for it, you should not have a drop of the milk! Do you
think, because there is no satisfying you. Long Laurence, that you
are to eat up what I earn with so much difficulty?" "Wife," said the
man, "be quiet, or I will give you a blow on your mouth!" "What!"
cried ;?he, "you threaten me, you glutton, you rascal, you lazy
Harryl" She was just laying hold of his hair, but Long Laurence got
up, seized both Lean Lisa's withered arms in one hand, and with the other he pressed down her head into the pillow, let her scold,
and held her until she fell asleep for very weariness.
Whether she continued to wrangle when she awoke next morning, or whether she went out to look for the florin which she
wanted to find, that I know not.
Godfather Death
A POOR MAN had twelve children and was forced to work night and
day to give them even bread. When therefore the thirteenth came
into the world, he knew not what to do in his trouble, but ran out
into the great highway, and resolved to ask the first person whom
he met to be godfather.
The first to meet him was the good God who aheady knew what
filled his heart, and said to him, "Poor man, I pity you. I v^dll hold your child at its christening, and v^dll take charge of it and make it
happy on earth." The man said, "Who are you?" "I am God."
"Then I do not desire to have you for a godfather," said the man;
"you give to the rich, and leave the poor to hunger." Thus spoke the man, for he did not know how vidsely God apportions riches and poverty. He turned therefore away from the Lord, and went farther.
Then the Devil came to him and said, "What do you seek? If you will take me as a godfather for yoirr child, I will give him gold in
plenty and all the joys of the world as well." The man asked, "Who
are you?" "I am the Devil." "Then I do not desire to have you for
godfather," said the man; "you deceive men and lead them astray." He went onward, and then came Death striding up to him with
v^dthered legs, and said, "Take me as godfather." The man asked,
"Who are you?" "I am Death, and I make all equal." Then said the
594 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
man, Tou are tbe right one, you take the rich as well as the poor,
without distinction; you shall be godfather." Death answered, "I will make your child rich and famous, for he who has me for a
friend can lack nothing." The man said, "Next Sunday is the christening; be there at the right time." Death appeared as he had prom- ised, and stood godfather quite in the usual way.
When the boy had grown up, his godfather one day appeared
and bade him go with him. He led him forth into a forest, and
showed him a herb which grew there, and said, "Now shall you receive your godfather's present. I make you a celebrated physician. When you are called to a patient, I will always appear to you. If I
stand by the head of the sick man, you may say with confidence
that you will make him well again, and if you give him of this herb
he will recover; but if I stand by the patient's feet, he is mine, and you must say that all remedies are in vain, and that no physician in
the world could save him. But beware of using the herb against my
will, or it might fare ill with you." It was not long before the youth was the most famous physician
in the whole world. He had only to look at the patient and he knew
his condition at once, and if he would recover, or must needs die.
From far and wide people came to him, sent for him when they
had anyone ill, and gave him so much money that he soon became a rich man.
Now it befell that the King became iU, and the physician was
summoned, and was to say if recovery were possible. But when he
came to the bed, Death was standing by the feet of the sick man,
and the herb did not grow which could save him.
"If I could but cheat Death for once," thought the physician, "he is sure to take it ill if I do, but, as I am his godson, he will shut one
eye; I will risk it." He therefore took up the sick man, and laid him the other way, so that now Death was standing by his head. Then
he gave the King some of the herb, and he recovered and grew
healthy again. But Death came to the physician, looking very black
and angry, threatened him with his finger, and said, "You have overreached me. This time I will pardon it, as you are my godson;
but if you venture it again, it will cost you yoiur neck, for I will take
you yourself away with me."
Soon afterwards the King's daughter fell into a severe illness. She was his only child, and he wept day and night, so that he began to
lose the sight of his eyes, and he caused it to be made known that
whosoever rescued her from death should be her husband and in-
Godfather Death 595
herit the crown. When the physician came to the sick girl's bed, he saw Death by her feet. He ought to have remembered the warning
given by his godfather, but he was so infatuated by the great
beauty of the King's daughter, and the happiness of becoming her husband, that he flung all thought to the winds. He did not see that
Death was casting angry glances on him, that he was raising his
hand in the air, and threatening him with his withered fist. He
raised up the sick girl, and placed her head where her feet had lain.
Then he gave her some of the herb, and instantly her cheeks
flushed red, and life stirred afresh in her.
When Death saw that for a second time he was defrauded of his
own property, he walked up to the physician with long strides, and
said, "AU is over with you, and now the lot falls on you," and seized him so firmly with his ice-cold hand, that he could not resist, and led him into a cave below the earth. There he saw how thousands
and thousands of candles were burning in countless rows, some
large, others half-sized, others small. Every instant some were extinguished, and others again burned up, so that the flames seemed to
leap hither and thither in perpetual change.
"See," said Death, "these are the lights of men's lives. The large ones belong to children, the half-sized ones to married people in
their prime; the little ones belong to old people; but children and
young folks likewise have often only a tiny candle."
"Show me the light of my life," said the physician, and he thought that it would be still very tall. Death pointed to a little end which
was just threatening to go out, and said, "Behold, it is there."
"Ah, dear godfather," said the horrified physician, "light a new one for me, do it for love of me, that I may enjoy my life, be King,
and the husband of the King's beautiful daughter."
"I cannot," answered Death, "one must go out before a new one
is lighted." "Then place the old one on a new one, that wiU go on
biuning at once when the old one has come to an end," pleaded the physician. Death behaved as if he were going to fulfill his wish, and
took hold of a tall new candle; but as he desired to revenge himself,
he purposely made a mistake in fixing it, and the little piece fell
down and was extinguished. Immediately the physician feU on the
groimd. And now he himself was in the hands of Death.
Death's Messengers
In ancient times a giant was once traveling on a great highway,
when suddenly an unknown man sprang up before him, and said,
"Halt, not one step farther!" "Whatl" cried the giant, "a creature whom I can crush between my fingers, wants to block my way?
Who art thou that thou darest to speak so boldly?" "1 am Death,"
answered the other. "No one resists me, and thou also must obey
my commands." But the giant refused, and began to struggle with Death. It was a long, violent battle. At last the giant got the upper
hand, and struck Death down with his fist, so that he dropped by a
stone. The giant went his way, and Death lay there conquered, and
so weak that he could not get up again. "What will be done now,"
said he, "if I stay lying here in a comer? No one will die now in the
world, and it will get so full of people that they won't have room to stand beside each other." In the meantime a young man came along the road, who was
strong and healthy, singing a song, and glancing around on every
side. When he saw the half-fainting one, he went compassionately
to him, raised him up, poured a strengthening draught out of his
flask for him, and waited till he came round. 'TDost thou know,"
said the stranger, while he was getting up, "who I am, and who it
is whom thou hast helped on his legs again?" "No," answered the
youth, "I do not know thee." "I am Death," said he. "I spsire no one, and can make no exception with thee— but that thou mayst see
that I am grateful, I promise thee that I will not fall on thee unexpectedly, but will send my messengers to thee before I come and
take thee away." "Well," said the youth, "it is something gained that I shall know when thou comest, and at any rate be safe from
thee for so long." Then he went on his way, and was light-hearted, and enjoyed himself, and hved without thought. But youth and
health did not last long; soon came sicknesses and sorrows, which
tormented him by day, and took away his rest by night. "Die, I
shall not," said he to himself, "for Death will send his messengers before that, but I do wish these wretched days of sickness were
over." As soon as he felt himself well again he began once more to live
merrily. Then one day some one tapped him on the shoulder. He
The Wonderful Glass 597
looked round, and Death stood behind him, and said, "Follow me,
the hour of thy departure from this world has come." "What,"
repHed the man, "wilt thou break thy word? Didst thou not prom- ise me that thou wouldst send thy messengers to me before coming
thyself? I have seen nonel" "Silencel" answered Death. "Have I not sent one messenger to thee after another? Did not fever come and
smite thee, and shake thee, and cast thee down? Has dizziness not
bewildered thy head? Has not gout twitched thee in all thy limbs?
Did not thine ears sing? Did not tooth-ache bite into thy cheeks?
Was it not dark before thine eyes? And besides all that, has not my
own brother. Sleep, reminded thee every night of me? Didst thou
not He by night as if thou wert aheady dead?" The man could make no answer; he yielded to his fate, and went away with Death.
The Wonderful Glass
A MAN once had so many children that all his friends had been
asked to become sponsors, so when another child was bom he had
no one to ask, and knew not what to do.
One night when he had laid himself down to sleep in great trou- ble, he had a wonderful dream. He dreamed that a voice said to
him, "Go out early tomorrow morning, and the first person you
meet, ask him to be godfather." On awaking, he determined to fol- low the advice given in his dream, and, dressing himself quickly, he
went out. Near his door he met a man, and Lmmediately asked him
to be sponsor for his child.
The stranger, before giving his consent, presented the man with a
glass, and said, "This is a most wonderful glass. The water with which you fill it has the power of curing sick persons; you have
only to observe where Death stands. If he stands by the head of the
sick person then give him the water, and he will be soon well; but
if he stands by the feet all your trouble will be useless, the sick person must die."
So the stranger became sponsor for his child, and gave to the father the wonderful goblet, which endowed the water he put into it
with such heaHng qualities. Besides this, he could always tell
whether the sick person would recover or not, and could therefore
598 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
speak confidently about curing him. By this he made a great deal of
money, and his fame spread far and wide.
Even the King sent for him, when one of his children was ill but
as the wonderful doctor entered, he saw Death standing at the
head of the bed, and knew that the child would recover after drinking the water in the magic glass; and so he did. The second time he
was sent for the same occurred; but on his third visit the doctor
saw Death seated at the foot of the bed, and he told the parents that the child must die.
After a while this doctor became curious, and thought he should
like to see where his child's godfather, who had given him such a valuable present, lived, and teU him how he was getting on. But
when he reached the house the household quite startled him. On
the first step a mop and a broom were quarreling together and
fighting furiously. "Where shaU I find the master of this house?" he
asked. "A step higher," answered the broom. But when he arrived on the second step, he saw a number of
dead fingers lying together, and he inquired again, "Where is the
master?" "A step higher," replied one of the fingers. On the third step lay a heap of human heads, who directed him
to go a step higher. On the foiuiJi step he saw a fish frizzling in the
pan, and cooking himself. He spoke to the man and told him to go
a step higher. On he went, and at last, on the fifth step he came
upon the door of a room, and peeping through the keyhole, saw the
godfather, and to his surprise, he had large horns; but as soon as he
opened the door and went in, the strange man with the horns
rushed away suddenly, laid himself on the bed, and drew the clothes over him.
Then said the man, "What is the meaning of this strange house- hold, good sir? On the steps I met with all sorts of strange things,
and was told to go up higher; and when I came to the door of this
room, I peeped through the keyhole and saw you with a pair of
horns on your head."
"That is not true," cried the pretended godfather, in such a terri- ble voice that the man, in a fright, turned to run away; but no one
knows what has become of him, for he has never been heard of since.
The Old Witch
There was once a little girl who was very obstinate and wilful, and
who never obeyed when her elders spoke to her; and so how could
she be happy? One day she said to her parents, "I have heard so much of the old Witch, that I will go and see her. People say she is
a wonderful old woman, and has many marvelous things in her
house; and I am very curious to see them."
Her parents, however, forbade her going, saying, "The Witch is a wicked old woman, who performs many godless deeds; and if you
go near her, you are no longer a child of ours."
The girl, however, would not turn back at her parents' command, but went to the Witch's house. When she arrived there the woman
asked her, "Why are you so pale?"
"Ah," rephed she, trembling all over, "I have frightened myself
so with what I have just seen."
"And what did you see?" inquired the old Witch.
"I saw a black man on your steps."
"That was a collier," replied she.
"Then I saw a gray man."
"That was a sportsman," said the old woman.
"After him I saw a blood-red man."
"That was a butcher," rephed the woman.
"But oh, I was most terrified," continued the girl, "when I peeped through yoiu: window, and saw not you, but a creature with
a fiery head."
"Then you have seen the Witch in her proper dress," said the old
woman. "For you I have long waited, and now you shall give me
light." So saying, she changed the girl into a block of wood, and then threw it into the fire; and when it was fully ahght she sat
down on the hearth, warmed herself, and said, "Ah, now for once it
bums brightly 1"
The Devil's Sooty Brother
A DISCHARGED SOLDIER had DO moncy left and did not know how to
get on. So he went out into the forest, and when he had walked for
a short time, he met a Httle man who was, however, the Devil. The
little man said to him, "What ails you, you seem so very sorrowful?" Then the soldier said, "I am hungry, but have no money." TTie
Devil said, "If you will hire yourself to me, and be my serving-man, you shall have enough for all your life. You shall serve me for seven
years, and after that you shall again be free. But one thing I must
tell you, and that is, you must not wash, comb, or trim yourself, or
cut yoiu: hair or nails, or wipe the water from your eyes." The soldier said, "All right, if there is no help for it," and went off with the little man, who straightway led him down into hell.
Then he told him what he had to do: he was to poke the fire
under the kettles wherein the hell-broth was stewing, keep the
house clean, drive all the sweepings behind the doors, and see that
everything was in order; but if he once peeped into the kettles, it
would go ill with him. The soldier said, "Good, I will take care." And then the old Devil went out again on his wanderings, and the
soldier entered upon his new duties, made the fire, and swept the
dirt well behind the doors, just as he had been bidden. When the
old Devil came back again, he looked to see if all had been done,
appeared satisfied, and went forth a second time.
The soldier now took a good look on every side; the kettles were
standing all round hell with a mighty fire below them, and inside
they were boiling and sputtering. He would have given anything to
look inside them, if the Devil had not so particularly forbidden
him. At last, he could no longer restrain himself, sHghtly raised the
lid of the first kettle, and peeped in, and there he saw his former
corporal shut in. "Aha, old birdi" said he. "Do I meet you here?
You once had me in your power, now I have you," and he quickly let the Hd fall, poked the fire, and added a fresh log. After that, he
went to the second kettle, raised its lid also a little, and peeped in;
his former ensign was inside that. "Aha, old bird, so I find you
here! You once had me in your power, now I have you." He closed the lid again, and fetched yet another log to make it really hot.
Then he wanted to see who might be shut up in the third kettle— it
The DeviTs Sooty Brother 601
was actually a general. "Aha, old bird, do I meet you here? Once
you had me in yoiur power, now I have you," and he fetched the bellows and made hell-fire flare well up under him.
So he did his work seven years in hell, did not wash, comb, or
trim himself, or cut his hair or nails, or wash the water out of his
eyes, and the seven years seemed so short to him that he thought he
had only been half a year. Now when the time had fully gone by,
the Devil came and said, "Well, Hans, what have you done?" "I have poked the fire under the kettles, and I have swept all the dirt
well behind the doors."
"But you have peeped into the kettles as well; it is lucky for you that you added fresh logs to them, or else yoiu* life would have
been forfeited. Now that your time is up, will you go home again?"
'^es" said the soldier, "I should very much Hke to see what my father is doing at home." The Devil said, "In order that you may re- ceive the wages you have earned, go and fiU your knapsack full of
the sweepings, and take it home with you. You must also go
unwashed and uncombed, with long hair on your head and beard,
and with uncut nails and dim eyes; and when you are asked
whence you come, you must say, 'From heU,' and when you are
asked who you are, you are to say. The Devil's sooty brother, and
my King as well.' " The soldier held his peace, and did as the Devil bade him, but he was not at all satisfied with his wages.
As soon as he was in the forest again, he took his knapsack from
his back to empty it, but on opening it, the sweepings had become
pure gold. "I should never have expected that," said he, and was well pleased, and entered the town. The landlord was standing in
front of the inn, and when he saw the soldier approaching, he was
terrified, because Hans looked so horrible— worse than a scare-crow.
He called to him and asked, "Whence comest thou?" "From hell."
"Who art thou?" "The Devil's sooty brother, and my King as well." Then the host would not let him enter, but when Hans showed him
the gold, he came and unlatched the door himself. Hans then ordered the best room and attendance, ate and drank his fill, but neither washed nor combed himself as the Devil had bidden him, and
at last lay down to sleep. But the knapsack full of gold remained
before the eyes of the landlord, and left him no peace, and during
the night he crept in and stole it away.
Next morning, however, when Hans got up and wanted to pay
the landlord and travel further, behold, his knapsack was gone! But
he soon composed himself and thought, "Thou hast been unfortunate from no fault of thine ovvm," and straightway went back again
6o2 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
to hell, complained of his misfortune to the old Devil, and begged
for his help. The Devil said, "Seat yourself, I will wash, comb, and
trim you, cut your hair and nails, and wash your eyes for you." And when he had done with him, he gave him the knapsack back again
full of sweepings, and said, "Go and tell the landlord that he must
return you yoru- money, or else I will come and fetch him, and he
shall poke the fire in your place." Hans went up and said to the
landlord, "Thou hast stolen my money; if thou dost not return it, thou shalt go down to hell in my place, and wilt look as horrible as
I." Then the landlord gave him the money, and more besides, only begging him to keep it secret, and Hans was now a rich man.
He set out on his way home to his father, bought himself a
shabby smock-frock to wear, and stroUed about making music, for he had learned to do that while he was with the Devil in hell.
There was, however, an old King in that coimtry, before whom he
had to play, and the King was so delighted with his playing, that he
promised him his eldest daughter in marriage. But when she heard
that she was to be married to a common fellow in a smock-frock, she
said, "Rather than do it, I would go into the deepest water." And then the King gave him the youngest, who was quite willing to do
it to please her father, and thus the Devil's sooty brother got the
King's daughter, and when the aged King died, the whole kingdom hkewise.
Bearskin
A YOUNG FELLOW enlisted as a soldier and conducted himself so
bravely that he was always the foremost when it rained bullets. As
long as the war lasted, all went well, but when peace was made, he
received his dismissal, and the captain said he might go where he
hked. His parents were dead, and he had no longer a home, so he
went to his brothers and begged them to take him in, and keep him
until war broke out again. The brothers, however, were hardhearted and said, "What can we do with thee? Thou art of no use
to us; go and make a Hving for thyself." The soldier had nothing left but his gun; he took that on his shoulder, and went forth into the world.
He came to a wide heath, on which nothing was to be seen but a
Bearskin 603
circle of trees; under these he sat sorrowfully down, and began to
think over his fate. "I have no money," thought he, "I have learnt no trade but that of fighting, and now that they have made peace
they don't want me any longer; so I see beforehand that I shall
have to starve." All at once he heard a rustling, and when he looked round, a strange man stood before him, who wore a green coat and
looked right stately, but had a hideous cloven foot. "I know aheady
what thou art in need of," said the man; "gold and possessions shalt thou have, as much as thou canst make away with, do what thou
wilt, but first I must know if thou art fearless, that I may not bestow my money in vain." "A soldier and fear— how can those two
things go together?" he answered; "thou canst put me to the proof."
"Very well, then," answered the man, 'look behind thee." The soldier turned round, and saw a large bear, which came
growling towards him. "Ohol" cried the soldier, "I will tickle thy
nose for thee, so that thou shalt soon lose thy fancy for growling," and he aimed at the bear and shot it through the muzzle; it fell
down and never stirred again. "I see quite well," said the stranger,
"that thou art not wanting in courage, but there is still another condition which thou wilt have to fulfill." "If it does not endanger my
salvation," replied the soldier, who knew very well who was standing by him. 'If it does, I'll have nothing to do with it." "Thou wilt
look to that for thyself," answered Greencoat; "thou shalt for the next seven years neither wash thyself, nor comb thy beard, nor thy
hair, nor cut thy nails, nor say one paternoster. I will give thee a
coat and a cloak, which during this time thou must wear. If thou
diest during these seven years, thou art mine; if thou remainest
alive, thou art free, and rich to boot, for all the rest of thy life." The soldier thought of the great extremity in which he now
found himself, and as he so often had gone to meet death, he re- solved to risk it now also, and agreed to the terms. The Devil took
ofiF his green coat, gave it to the soldier, and said, "If thou hast this coat on thy back and puttest thy hand into the pocket, thou wilt always find it full of money." Then he pulled the skin ofi^ the bear
and said, "This shall be thy cloak, and thy bed also, for thereon shalt thou sleep, and in no other bed shalt thou lie, and because of
this apparel shalt thou be called Bearskin." After this the Devil vanished.
The soldier put the coat on, felt at once in the pocket, and found
that the thing was really true. Then he put on the bearskin and
went forth into the world, and enjoyed himself, refraining from
nothing that did him good and his money harm. Diuing the first
6o4 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
year his appearance was passable, but during the second he began
to look like a monster. His hair covered nearly the whole of his
face, his beard was Hke a piece of coarse felt, his fingers had claws, and his face was so covered with dirt that if cress had been sown
on it, it would have come up. Whosoever saw him, ran away, but as
he everywhere gave the poor money to pray that he might not die
during the seven years, and as he paid well for everything, he still
always found shelter. In the fourth year, he entered an inn where
the landlord would not receive him, and would not even let him
have a place in the stable, because he was afraid the horses would
be scared. But as Bearskin thrust his hand into his pocket and
pulled out a handful of ducats, the host let himself be persuaded
and gave him a room in an outhouse. Bearskin was, however,
obliged to promise not to let himself be seen, lest the inn should get a bad name.
As Bearskin was sitting alone in the evening, and wishing from
the bottom of his heart that the seven years were over, he heard a
loud lamenting in a neighboring room. He had a compassionate
heart, so he opened the door, and saw an old man weeping bitterly,
and wringing his hands. Bearskin went nearer, but the man sprang
to his feet and tried to escape from him. At last when the man perceived that Bearskin's voice was human he let himself be prevailed on, and by kind words Bearskin succeeded so far that the old man
revealed the cause of his grief. His property had dwindled away by
degrees, he and his daughters would have to starve, and he was so
poor that he could not pay the innkeeper, and was to be put in
prison. 'If that is thy only trouble," said Bearskin, "I have plenty of
money." He caused the innkeeper to be brought thither, paid him
and put a purse full of gold into the poor old man's pocket besides. When the old man saw himself set free from all his troubles he
did not know how to be grateful enough. "Come with me," said he
to Bearskin; "my daughters are all miracles of beauty; choose one of them for thyself as a wife. When she hears what thou hast done
for me, she will not refuse thee. Thou dost in truth look a little
strange, but she will soon put thee to rights again." This pleased Bearskin well, and he went. When the eldest saw him she was so
terribly alarmed at his face that she screamed and ran away. The
second stood still and looked at him from head to foot, but then she
said, "How can I accept a husband who no longer has a human form? The shaven bear that once was here and passed itself off for
a man pleased me far better, for at any rate it wore a hussar's dress and white gloves. If it were nothing but ugliness, I might get used
Bearskin 605
to that." Tlie youngest, however, said, "Dear father, that must be a
good man to have helped you out of yom- trouble, so if you have
promised him a bride for doing it, your promise must be kept."
It was a pity that Bearsldn's face was covered with dirt and with hair, for if not they might have seen how delighted he was when he
heard these words. He took a ring from his finger, broke it in two,
and gave her one half, the other he kept for himself. He wrote his
name, however, on her half, and hers on his, and begged her to
keep her piece carefully, and then he took his leave and said, "1 must still wander about for three years, and if I do not return then,
thou art free, for I shall be dead. But pray to God to preserve my
Hfe." The poor betrothed bride dressed herself entirely in black, and
when she thought of her futare bridegroom tears came into her
eyes. Nothing but contempt and mockery fell to her lot from her
sisters. "Take care," said the eldest, "if thou givest him thy hand, he will strike his claws into it." "Beware!" said the second. "Bears like sweet things, and if he takes a fancy to thee, he will eat thee
up." "Thou must always do as he likes," began the eldest again, "or
else he will growl." And the second continued, "but the wedding
will be a merry one, for bears dance well." The bride was silent, and did not let them vex her. Bearskin, however, traveled about the
world from one place to another, did good where he was able, and
gave generously to the poor that they might pray for him.
At length, as the last day of the seven years dawned, he went
once more out on to the heath, and seated himself beneath the circle of trees. It was not long before the wind whistled, and the Devil
stood before him and looked angrily at him; then he threw Bearskin
his old coat, and asked for his own green one back. "We have not
got so far as that yet," answered Bearskin, "thou must first make me
clean." Whether the Devil liked it or not, he was forced to fetch water, and wash Bearskin, comb his hair, and cut his nails. After
this, he looked like a brave soldier, and was much handsomer than
he had ever been before.
When the Devil had gone away. Bearskin was quite lighthearted. He "went into the town, put on a magnificent velvet coat, seated himself in a carriage drawn by four white horses, and drove
to his bride's house. No one recognized him, the father took him for a distinguished general, and led him into the room where his
daughters were sitting. He was forced to place himself between the
two elder ones; they helped him to wine, gave him the best pieces
of meat, and thought that in all the world they had never seen a
6o6 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
handsomer man. The bride, however, sat opposite to him in her
black dress, and never raised her eyes, nor spoke a word.
When at length he asked the father if he would give him one of
his daughters to wife, the two eldest jimiped up, ran into their bedrooms to put on splendid dresses, for each of them fancied she was
the chosen one. The stranger, as soon as he was alone with his
bride, brought out his half of the ring, and threw it in a glass of
wine which he reached across the table to her. She took the wine,
but when she had drunk it, and found the half ring lying at the bottom, her heart began to beat. She got the other half, which she
wore on a ribbon roimd her neck, joined them, and saw that the
two pieces fitted exactly together. Then said he, "I am thy be- trothed bridegroom, whom thou sawest as Bearskin, but through
God's grace I have again received my human form, and have once
more become clean." He went up to her, embraced her, and gave her a kiss.
In the meantime the two sisters came back in full dress, and
when they saw that the handsome man had fallen to the share of
the youngest, and heard that he was Bearskin, they ran out full of
anger and rage. One of them drowned herself in the well, the other
hanged herself on a tree. In the evening, some one knocked at the
door, and when the bridegroom opened it, it was the Devil in his
green coat, who said, "Seest thou, I have now got two souls in the
place of thy onel"
The Devil and His Grandmother
There was a great war in which the King had many soldiers. But
he gave them small pay, so small that they could not Hve upon it.
Three of them agreed among themselves to desert. One of them
said to the others, *Tf we are caught we shall be hanged on the gallows; how shall we manage it?" Another said, "Look at that great cornfield, if we were to hide ourselves there, no one could find us;
the troops are not allowed to enter it, and tomorrow they are to
march away." They crept into the com, but the troops did not march away, but remained lying all round about it. They stayed in
the com for two days and two nights, and were so hungry that they
all but died, but if they had come out, their death would have been
The Devil and His Grandmother 607
certain. Then said they, "What is the use of our deserting if we
have to perish miserably here?" But now a fiery dragon came flying through the air and it came
down to them and asked why they had concealed themselves there.
They answered, "We are three soldiers who have deserted because the pay was so bad, and now we shall have to die of hunger if we
stay here, or to dangle on the gallows if we go out." "If you will
serve me for seven years," said the dragon, "I will convey you
through the army so that no one shall seize you." "We have no
choice and are compelled to accept," they replied. Then the dragon caught hold of them vidth his claws, and carried them away through
the air over the army, and put them down again on the earth far
from it; but the dragon was no other than the Devil. He gave them
a small whip and said, "Whip with it and crack it, and then as much gold will spring up round about as you can vvdsh for; then
you can live Hke great lords, keep horses, and drive your carriages,
but when the seven years have come to an end, you are my property." Then he put before them a book which they were all three
forced to sign. "I will, however, then set you a riddle," said he,
"and if you can guess that, you shall be free, and released from my
power." Then the dragon flew away from them, and they went away vidth
their whip, had gold in plenty, ordered themselves rich apparel,
and traveled about the world. Wherever they were they hved in
pleasure and magnificence, rode on horseback, drove in carriages,
ate and drank, but did nothing wicked. The time slipped quickly
away, and when the seven years were coming to an end, two of
them were terribly anxious and alarmed; but the third took the
affair easily, and said, "Brothers, fear nothing, my head is sharp
enough, I shall guess the riddle." They went out into the open country and sat down, and the two pulled sorrowful faces.
Then an aged woman came up to them who inquired why they
were so sad. "Alasl" said they, "how can that concern you? After
all, you cannot help us." "Who knows?" said she, "confide your
trouble to me." So they told her that they had been the Devil's ser- vants for nearly seven years, and that he had provided them with
gold as plentifully as if it had been blackberries, but that they had
sold themselves to him, and were forfeited to him, if at the end of
the seven years they could not guess a riddle. The old woman said,
"If you are to be saved, one of you must go into the forest; there he will come to a fallen rock which looks like a little house; he must
enter that, and then he will obtain help." The two melancholy ones
6o8 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
thought to themselves, "That will still not save us," and stayed where they were, but the third, the merry one, got up and walked
on in the forest until he found the rock-house.
In the little house, however, a very aged woman was sitting, who
was the Devil's grandmother, and she asked the soldier where he came from, and what he wanted there. He told her everything that
had happened, and as he pleased her well, she had pity on him,
and said she would help him. She lifted up a great stone which lay
above a cellar, and said, "Conceal yourself there, you can hear ev- erything that is said here; only sit still, and do not stir. When the
dragon comes, I will question him about the riddle. He tells everything to me, so listen carefully to his answer."
At twelve o'clock at night, the dragon came flying thither, and asked for his dinner. The grandmother laid the table, and served up
food and drink, so that he was pleased, and they ate and drank to- gether. In the course of conversation, she asked him what kind of a
day he had had, and how many souls he had got. "Nothing went
very well today," he answered, "but I have laid hold of three soldiers—I have them safe." "Indeedl Three soldiers I That's something
Hke, but they may escape you yet." The Devil said mockingly,
"They are minel I will set them a riddle, which they will never in
this world be able to guess!" "What riddle is that?" she inquired. "I will tell you. In the great North Sea lies a dead dog-fish; that shall be your roast meat, and the rib of a whale shall be your silver
spoon, and a hollow old horse's hoof shall be your wine-glass." When the Devil had gone to bed, the old grandmother raised up
the stone, and let out the soldier. "Have you paid particular attention to everything?" "Yes," said he, "I know enough, and will contrive to save myself." Then he had to go back another way, through the window, secretly and with all speed, to his companions. He told
them how the Devil had been overreached by the old grandmother, and how he had learned the answer to the riddle from him. Then
they were all joyous, and of good cheer, and took the whip and
whipped so much gold for themselves that it ran all over the
ground.
When the seven years had fully gone by, the Devil came with a
book, showed the signatures, and said, "I will take you with me to hell. There you shall have a meall If you can guess what kind of
roast meat you will have to eat, you shall be free and released from
your bargain, and may keep the whip as well." Then the first soldier began and said, "In the great North Sea lies a dead dog-fish,
that no doubt is the roast meat." The Devil was angry, and began
The Grave Mound 609
to mutter "Hm! hml hml" and asked the second, "But what will
your spoon be?" "The rib of a whale, that is to be our silver spoon."
The Devil made a wry face, again growled "Hml hml hml" and
said to the third, "And do you also know what your wine-glass is to
be?" "An old horse's hoof is to be our wine-glass." Then the Devil flew away with a loud cry, and had no more
power over them, but the three kept the whip, whipped as much
money for themselves with it as they wanted, and lived happily to their end.
The Grave Mound
A RICH FARMER was One day standing in his yard inspecting his
fields and gardens. The com was growing up vigorously and the
fruit trees were heavily laden with fruit. The grain of the year be- fore still lay in such immense heaps on the floors that the rafters
could hardly bear it. Then he went into the stable, where were
well-fed oxen, fat cows, and horses bright as looking-glass. At
length he went back into his sitting-room, and cast a glance at the
iron chest in which his money lay.
While he was thus standing surveying his riches, all at once there
was a loud knock close by him. The knock was not at the door of
his room, but at the door of his heart. It opened, and he heard a
voice which said to him, "Hast thou done good to thy family with it? Hast thou considered the necessities of the poor? Hast thou
shared thy bread with the hungry? Hast thou been contented with
what thou hast, or didst thou always desire to have more?" The
heart was not slow in answering, "I have been hard and pitiless, and have never shown any kindness to my own family. If a beggar
came, I turned away my eves from him. I have not troubled myself
about God, but have thought only of increasing my wealth. If ev- erything which the sky covers had been mine own, I should still not
have had enough." When he was aware of this answer he was greatly alarmed, his
knees began to tremble, and he was forced to sit down.
Then there was another knock, but the knock was at the door of
his room. It was his neighbor, a poor man who had a number of
children whom he could no longer satisfy with food. '1 know,"
6io Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
thought the poor man, "that my neighbor is rich, but he is as hard
as he is rich. I don't believe he will help me, but my children are
crying for bread, so I will venture it." He said to the rich man,
"Thou dost not readily give away anything that is thine, but I stand here like one who feels the water rising above his head. My children are starving; lend me four measures of com." The rich man looked at him long, and then the first sunbeam of
mercy began to melt away a drop of the ice of greediness. "I will
not lend thee four measures," he answered, "but I will make thee a
present of eight, but thou must fulfill one condition." "What am I
to do?" said the poor man. "When I am dead, thou shalt watch for
three nights by my grave." The peasant was disturbed in his mind at this request, but in the need in which he was, he would have
consented to anything; he accepted, therefore, and carried the com home with him.
It seemed as if the rich man had foreseen what was about to happen, for when three days were gone by, he suddenly dropped down
dead. No one knew exactly how it came to pass, but no one grieved
for him. When he was buried, the poor man remembered his promise. He woiild willingly have been released from it, but he thought,
"After all, he acted kindly by me. I have fed my hungry children with his com, and even if that were not the case, where I have once
given my promise I must keep it." At nightfall he went into the churchyard, and seated himself on the grave moxmd. Everything
was quiet; only the moon appeared above the grave, and frequently
an owl flew past and uttered her melancholy cry. When the sun
rose, the poor man betook himself in safety to his home, and in the
same manner the second night passed quietly by. On the evening of
the third day he felt a strange uneasiness; it seemed to him that
something was about to happen. When he went out he saw, by the
churchyard-waU, a man whom he had never seen before. He was
no longer young, had scars on his face, and his eyes looked sharply
and eagerly aroxmd. He was entirely covered with an old cloak, and
nothing was visible but his great riding-boots. "What art thou looking for here?" the peasant asked. "Art thou not afraid of the lonely
churchyard?"
"I am looking for nothing," he answered, "and I am afraid of nothingi I am like the yoiuigster who went forth to learn how to
shiver, and had his labor for his pains, but got the King's daughter to wife and great wealth with her, only I have remained poor. I am
nothing but a paid-off soldier, and I mean to pass the night here,
The Grave Mound 611
because I have no other shelter." "If thou art without fear," said the
peasant, "stay with me, and help me to watch that grave there."
"To keep watch is a soldier's business," he replied, "whatever we fall in with here, whether it be good or bad, we will share it between us." The peasant agreed to this, and they seated themselves on the grave together.
All was quiet until midnight, when suddenly a shrill whistling
was heard in the air, and the two watchers perceived the Evil One
standing bodily before them. "Be off, you ragamuffinsi" cried he to
them, "the man who Hes in that grave belongs to me; I want to take
him, and if you don't go away I will wring your necks!" "Sir with
the red feather," said the soldier, "you are not my captain, I have no need to obey you, and I have not yet learned how to fear. Go
away, we shall stay sitting here."
The Devil thought to himself, "Money is the best thing with
which to get hold of these two vagabonds." So he began to play a softer tune, and asked quite kindly, if they would not accept a bag
of money, and go home with it. "That is worth Hstening to," answered the soldier, "but one bag of gold won't serve us. If you will give as much as will go into one of my boots, we wiU quit the field
for you and go away."
"1 have not so much as that about me," said the Devil, "but I will fetch it. In the neighboring town Hves a money-changer who is
a good friend of mine, and will readily advance it to me." When the
Devil had vanished the soldier took his left boot off, and said, "We
will soon pull the charcoal-burner's nose for him; just give me your
knife, comrade." He cut the sole off the boot, and put it in the high grass near the grave on the edge of a hole that was half overgrown. "That will do," said he; "now the chimney-sweep may
come." They both sat down and waited, and it was not long before the
Devil returned with a small bag of gold in his hand. "Just pour it
in," said the soldier, raising up the boot a httle, "but that won't be
enough." The Black One shook out all that was in the bag; the gold
feU through, and the boot remained empty. "Stupid Devil," cried
the soldier, "it won't dol Didn't I say so at once? Go back again,
and bring more."
The Devil shook his head, went, and in an hour's time came with
a much larger bag under his arm. "Now pour it in," cried the soldier, "but I doubt the boot will be full." The gold clinked as it fell, but the boot remained empty. The Devil looked in himself with his
6i2 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
burning eyes, and convinced himself of the truth. "You have shamefully big calves to your legsl" cried he, and made a wry face.
"Did you think," replied the soldier, "that I had a cloven foot Kke you? Since when have you been so stingy? See that you get more
gold together, or our bargain v^dll come to nothing!" The Wicked One went off again. This time he stayed away
longer, and when at length he appeared he was panting under the
weight of a sack which lay on his shoulders. He emptied it into the
boot, which was just as far from being filled as before. He became
furious, and was just going to tear the boot out of the soldiers
hands, but at that moment the first ray of the rising sun broke forth
from the sky, and the Evil Spirit fled away with loud shrieks. The
poor soul was saved.
The peasant v^dshed to divide the gold, but the soldier said, "Give what falls to my lot to the poor. I will come with, thee to thy cottage, and together we will live in rest and peace on what remains, as long as God is pleased to permit."
The Peasant and the Devil
Theke was once on a time a far-sighted, crafty peasant whose tricks
were much talked about. The best story is, however, how he once
got hold of the Devil and made a fool of him.
The peasant had one day been working in his field, and as twilight had set in, was making ready for the journey home, when he saw a heap of burning coals in the middle of his field, and when,
full of astonishment, he went up to it, a little black devil was sitting on the live coals. "Thou dost indeed sit upon a treasurel" said the peasant. "Yes, in truth"; replied the Devil, "on a treasure which
contains more gold and silver than thou hast ever seen in thy lifel" "The treasiure lies in my field and belongs to me," said the peasant.
"It is thine," answered the Devil, "if thou wait for two years give me the half of everything thy field produces. Money I have enough
of, but I have a desire for the fruits of the earth." The peasant
agreed to the bargain. *Tn order, however, that no dispute may
arise about the division," said he, "everything that is above ground
shall belong to thee, and what is under the earth to me." The Devil
The Three Apprentices 613
was quite satisfied with that, but the cunning peasant had sown
turnips.
Now when the time for harvest came, the Devil appeared and
wanted to take away his crop; but he found nothing but the yellow
withered leaves, while the peasant, full of delight, was digging up
his turnips. "Thou hast had the best of it for once," said the Devil,
*l3ut the next time that won't do. What grows above ground shall
be thine, and what is under it, mine." "I am willing," replied the peasant; but when the time came to sow, he did not again sow turnips, but wheat. The grain became ripe, and the peasant went into
the field and cut the full stalks down to the groimd. When the
Devil came, he found nothing but the stubble, and went away in a
fury down into a cleft in the rocks. "That is the way to cheat the
Devil," said the peasant, and went and fetched away the treasure.
The Three Apprentices
There were once three apprentices who had agreed to keep always
together while traveling, and always to work in the same town. At
one time, however, their masters had no more work to give them, so
that at last they were in rags, and had nothing to five on. Then
one of them said, "What shall we do? We cannot stay here any longer, we will travel once more, and if we do not find any work in
the town we go to, we will arrange with the innkeeper there, that
we are to write and tell him where we are staying, so that we can
always have news of each other, and then we will separate." And that seemed best to the others also.
They went forth, and met on the way a richly dressed man who
asked who they were. "We are apprentices looking for work; up to this time we have kept together, but if we cannot find anything to
do we are going to separate." "There is no need for that," said the
man, "if you will do what I tell you, you shall not want for gold or for work— nay, you shall become great lords, and drive in your carriages!" One of them said, 'If our souls and salvation be not endangered, we wiU certainly do it." "They will not," replied the man, "I
have no claim on you." One of the others had, however, looked at his feet, and when he
6i4 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
saw a horse's foot and a man's foot, he did not want to have anything to do with him. The Devil, however, said, "Be easy, I have no designs on you, but on another soul, which is half my own already,
and whose measure shall but run full." As they were now seciu-e, they consented, and the Devil told them what he wanted. The first
was to answer, "All three of us," to every question; the second was
to say, "For money," and the third, "And quite right tool" They were always to say this, one after the other, but they were not to
say one word more, and if they disobeyed this order, all their
money would disappear at once, but so long as they observed it,
their pockets would always be full.
As a beginning, he at once gave them as much as they could
carry, and told them to go to such and such an inn when they got
to the town. They went to it, and the innkeeper came to meet them,
and asked if they wished for anything to eat. The first replied, "All
three of us." "Yes," said the host, "that is what I mean." The second
said, "For money." "Of course," said the host. The third said "And
quite right tool" "Certainly it is right," said the host. Good meat and drink were now brought to them, and they were
well waited on. After the dinner came the payment, and the innkeeper gave the bill to the one who said, "All three of us," the second said, "For money," and the third, "And quite right tool" "Indeed it is right," said the_ host, "all three pay, and without money I
can give nothing." They, however, paid still more than he had
asked. The lodgers, who were looking on, said, "These people must
be mad." "Yes, indeed they are," said the host, "they are not very
wise." So they stayed some time in the inn, and said nothing else
but "All three of U5," "For money," and "And quite right too!" But they saw and knew all that was going on.
It so happened that a great merchant came with a large sum of
money, and <:«id. "Sir host, take care of my money for me; here are
three crazy apprentices who might steal it from me." The host did as he was ask^d. As he was carrying the trunk into his room, he felt
that it was heavy with gold. Thereupon he gave the three apprentices a lodging below, but the mprphqnt came upstairs into a separate apartment. When it was midnight, and the host thought that
all were fi<;lfep, he came with his wife, and they had an axe and
struck the rich merchant dead; and after they had murdered him
they went to bed again.
When it was day there was a great outcry; the merchant lay dead
in bed bathed in blood. All the guests ran at once, but the host
The Three Apprentices 615
said, "The three crazy apprentices have done this"; the lodgers
confirmed it, and said, "It can have been no one else." The innkeeper, however, had them called, and said to them, "Have you
killed the merchant?" "All three of us," said the first; "For money,"
said the second; and the third added, "And quite right tool" "There
now, you hear," said the host, "they confess it themselves." They were taken to prison, therefore, and were to be tried. When they
saw that things were going so seriously, they were after all afraid,
but at night the Devil came and said, "Bear it just one day longer, and do not play away your luck; not one hair of your head shall be
hurt." The next morning they were led to the bar, and the judge said,
"Are you the murderers?" "All three of us." "Why did you kill the
merchant?" "For money." "You wicked wretches, you have no horror of your sins?" "And quite right too!" "They have confessed, and
are still stubborn," said the judge, "lead them to death instantly." So they were taken out, and the host had to go with them into the
circle. When they were taken hold of by the executioner's men, and were just going to be led up to the scaffold where the headsman
was standing with naked sword, a coach drawTi by four blood-red
chestnut horses came up suddenly, driving so fast that fire flashed
from the stones, and some one made signs from the window with a white handkerchief.
Then said the headsman, 'It is a pardon coming," and 'TardonI
pardon I" was called from the carriage also. The Devil stepped out
as a very noble gentleman, beautifully dressed, and said, "You
thi'ee are innocent; you may now speak, make known what you
have seen and heard." Then said the eldest, "We did not kill the
merchant; the murderer is standing there in the circle," and he
pointed to the innkeeper. "In proof of this, go into his cellar, where
many others whom he has killed are still hanging."
The judge sent the executioner's men thither, and they found it was as the apprentices said, and when they had informed th^ judge
of this, he caused the innkeeper to be led up, and his head was cut
off. Then said the Devil to the three, "Now I have got the soul which I wanted to have, and you are free, and have money for the
rest of your lives."
Doctor Knowall
There was once on a time a poor peasant called Crabb, who drove
with two oxen a load of wood to the town, and sold it to a doctor
for two thalers. When the money was being counted out to him, it
so happened that the doctor was sitting at table, and when the
peasant saw how daintily he ate and drank, his heart desired what
he saw, and he would wiUingly have been a doctor too. So he
remained standing a while, and at length inquired if he too could
not be a doctor. "Oh, yes," said the doctor, "that is soon managed."
"What must I do?" asked the peasant. "In the first place, buy thyself an A B C book of the land which has a cock on the frontispiece; in the second, turn thy cart and thy two oxen into money,
and get thyself some clothes, and whatsoever else pertains to medicine; thirdly, have a sign painted for thyself with the words, *I am
Doctor Knowall,' and have that nailed above thy house-door." The peasant did everything that he had been told to do.
When he had doctored people awhile, but not long, a rich and
great lord had some money stolen. Then he was told about Doctor
Knowall who lived in such and such a village, and must know what
had become of the money. So the lord had the horses put in his carriage, drove out to the village, and asked Crabb if he were Doctor
Knowall. Yes, he was, he said. Then he was to go with him and
bring back the stolen money. "Oh, yes, but Grethe, my wife, must
go too." The lord was willing, and let both of them have a seat in the carriage, and they all drove away together.
When they came to the nobleman's castle, the table was spread,
and Crabb was told to sit down and eat. "Yes, but my wife, Grethe,
too," said he, and he seated himself with her at the table. And when the first servant came with a dish of deUcate fare, the peasant
nudged his wife, and said, "Grethe, that was the first." meaning that was the servant who brought the first dish. The servant, however, thought he intended by that to say, "That is the first thief," and as he actually was so, he was terrified, and said to his comrade
outside, "The doctor knows all: we shall fare ill, he said I was the
first." The second did not want to go in at all, but was forced. So when
he went in with his dish, the peasant nudged his wiie, and said.
The Three Army Surgeons 617
"Grethe, that is the second." This servant was just as much alarmed, and he got out. The third did not fare better, for the peasant again said, "Grethe, that is the third." The fourth had to carry in a dish that was covered, and the lord
told the doctor that he was to show his skill, and guess what was
beneath the cover. The doctor looked at the dish, had no idea what
to say, and cried, "Ah, poor Crabb." When the lord heard that, he
cried, "Therel He knows who has the moneyl" On this the servants looked terribly uneasy, and made a sign to
the doctor that they wished him to go out for a moment. When
therefore he went out, all four of them confessed to him that they
had stolen the money, and said that they would willingly restore it
and give him a heavy siun into the bargain, if he would not denounce them, for if he did they would be hanged. They led him to
the spot where the money was concealed.
With this the doctor was satisfied, and returned to the hall, sat
down to the table, and said, "My lord, now will I search in my
book where the gold is hidden." The fifth servant, however, crept into the stove to hear if the doctor knew still more. The doctor,
however, sat still and opened his A B C book, turned the pages
backwards and forwards, and looked for the cock. As he could not
find it immediately he said, "I know you are there, so you had better show yourself." Then the fellow in the stove thought that the
doctor meant him, and full of terror, sprang out crying, "That man
knows everything!" Then Doctor Knowall showed the count where the money was, but did not say who had stolen it, and received
from both sides much money in reward, and became a renowned man.
The Three Army Surgeons
Three abmy surgeons who thought they knew their art perfectly
and were travehng about the world, came to an inn where they
wanted to pass the night. The host asked whence they came, and
whither they were going. "We are roaming about the world and
practicing our art." "Just show me for once in a way what you can
do," said the host. Then the first said he would cut ojff his hand, and put it on again early next morning; the second said he would tear
6i8 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
out his heart, and replace it next morning; the third said he would
cut out his eyes and heal them again next morning. "If you can do
that," said the innkeeper, "you have learnt everything." They, how- ever, had a salve, with which they rubbed themselves, which joined
parts together, and they carried the little bottle in which it was, constantly with them. Then they cut the hand, heart and eyes from their
bodies as they had said they would, and laid them all together on a
plate, and gave it to the innkeeper. The innkeeper gave it to a servant who was to set it in the cupboard, and take good care of it.
The girl, however, had a lover in secret, who was a soldier. When
the innkeeper, the three army surgeons, and every one else in the
house were asleep, the soldier came and wanted something to eat.
The girl opened the cupboard and brought him some food, and forgot to shut the cupboard-door again; she seated herself at the table
by her lover, and they chattered away together. While she sat so
contentedly there thinking of no ill luck, the cat came creeping in,
found the cupboard open, took the hand and heart and eyes of the
three army surgeons, and ran off with them.
When the soldier had done eating, and the girl was taking away
the things and going to shut the cupboard, she saw that the plate
which the innkeeper had given her to take care of, was empty.
Then she said in a fright to her lover, "Ah, what shall I do? The hand is gone, the heart and the eyes are gone too, what will become of me in the morning?" "Be easy," said he, '1 will help you out of your trouble— there is a thief hanging outside on the gaUows,
I will cut off his hand. Which hand was it?" "The right one." Then the girl gave him a sharp knife, and he went and cut the poor sinner's right hand off, and brought it to her. After this he caught the cat and cut its eyes out, and now nothing but the heart was wanting. "Have you not been slaughtering? And are not the dead pigs
in the cellar?" said he. "Yes," said the girl. "That's well," said the
soldier, and he went down and fetched a pig's heart. The girl placed all together on the plate, and put it in the cupboard, and
when after this her lover took leave of her, she went quietly to bed.
In the morning when the three army surgeons got up, they told
the girl she was to bring them the plate on which the hand, heart,
and eyes were lying. Then she brought it out of the cupboard, and
the first fixed the thiefs hand on and smeared it with salve, and it
grew to his arm directly. The second took the cat's eyes and put
them in his own head. The third fixed the pig's heart firm in the place where his own had been, and the iimkeeper stood by, ad-
The Three Army Surgeons 619
mired their sldll, and said he had never yet seen such a thing as
that done, and would sing their praises and recommend them to
every one. Then they paid their bill, and traveled farther.
As they were on their way, the one with the pig's heart did not stay with them at all, but wherever there was a comer he ran to it,
and rooted about in it with his nose as pigs do. The others wanted
to hold him back by the tail of his coat, but that did no good; he
tore himself loose, and ran wherever the dirt was thickest. The second also behaved very strangely; he rubbed his eyes, and said to
the others, "Comrades, what is the matter? I don't see at all. Will
one of you lead me, so that I do not fall." Then with difficulty they traveled on till evening, when they reached another inn.
They went into the bar together, and there at a table in the
comer sat a rich man counting money. The one with the thiefs
hand walked round about him, made a sudden movement twice
with his arm, and at last when the stranger turned away, he
snatched at the pile of money, and took a handful from it. One of
them saw this and said, "Comrade, what are you about? You must
not steal— shame on you!" "Eh," said he, "but how can I stop my- self? My hand twitches, and I am forced to snatch things whether I
will or not." After this, they lay down to sleep, and while they were lying
there it was so dark that no one could see his ov/n hand. All at once
the one with the cat's eyes awoke, aroused the others, and said,
"Brothers, just look up, do you see the white mice running about
there?" The two sat up, but could see nothing. Then said he,
"Things are not right with us, we have not got back again what is
ours. We must return to the innkeeper, he has deceived us." They went back, therefore, the next morning, and told the host
they had not got what was their own again; that the first had a
thiefs hand, the second cat's eyes, and the third a pig's heart. The innkeeper said that the girl must be to blame for that, and was
going to call her, but when she had seen the three coming, she had
run out by the back door, and not come back. Then the three said
he must give them a great deal of money, or they would set his
house on fire. He gave them what he had, and whatever he could
get together, and the three went away with it. It was enough for
the rest of their lives, but they would rather have had their ovna
proper organs.
The Spirit in the Bottle
There was once a poor woodcutter who toiled from early morning
till late night. When at last he had laid by some money he said to
his boy, "Thou art my only child, I will spend the money which I have earned with the sweat of my brow on thy education; if thou
leamest some honest trade thou canst support me in my old age,
when my limbs have grown stiflF and I am obhged to stay at home." Then the boy went to a High School and learned diligently so
that his masters praised him, and he remained there a long time.
When he had worked through two classes, but was still not yet perfect in everything, the httle pittance which the father had earned
was all spent, and the boy was obliged to return home to him.
"Ah," said the father, sorrowfully, "I can give thee no more, and in these hard times I cannot earn a farthing more than will suffice for
our daily bread."
"Dear father," answered the son, "do not trouble thyself about it,
if it is God's wall, it will turn to my advantage. I shall soon accustom myself to it." When the father wanted to go into the forest to earn money by helping to pile and stack wood and also to chop it,
the son said, "I will go with thee and help thee." "Nay, my son,"
said the father, "that would be hard for thee; thou art not accus- tomed to rough work, and wilt not be able to bear it, besides I have
only one axe and no money left wherewith to buy another." "Just
go to the neighbor," answered the son, "he vidll lend thee his axe
until I have earned one for myself." The father then borrowed an axe of the neighbor, and next morning at break of day they went out into the forest together. The son
helped his father and was quite merry and brisk about it. But when
the sun was right over their heads, the father said, "We will rest,
and have our dirmer, and then we shall work as well again." The
son took his bread in his hands, and said, "Rest thou, father, I am not tired; I will walk up and down a httle in the forest, and look for
birds' nests." "Oh, thou fool," said the father, "why shouldst thou want to run about there? Afterwards thou wilt be tired, and no
longer able to raise thy arm; stay here, and sit down beside me." The son, however, went into the forest, ate his bread, was very
The Spirit in the Bottle 621
merry and peered in among the green branches to see if he could
discover a bird's nest anywhere.
So he went up and down to see if he could find a bird's nest, until at last he came to a great dangerous-looldng oak, which certainly was aheady many hundred years old, and which five men
could not have spanned. He stood still and looked at it, and
thought, "Many a bird must have built its nest in that." Then all at once it seemed to him that he heard a voice. He listened and became aware that some one was crying in a very smothered voice,
"Let me out, let me out!" He looked around, but could discover nothing; nevertheless, he fancied that the voice came out of the
ground. Then he cried, "Where art thou?" The voice answered, '1 am here down among the roots of the oak tree. Let me outl Let me
out!" The scholar began to loosen the earth under the tree, and search
among the roots, until at last he found a glass bottle in a httle hollow. He hfted it up and held it against the fight, and then saw a
creature shaped fike a frog springing up and doviTi in it. "Let me
outl Let me outl" it cried anew, and the scholar, thinking no evil, drew the cork out of the bottle. Immediately a spirit ascended from
it, and began to grow, and grew so fast that in a very few moments
he stood before the scholar, a terrible fellow as big as half the tree
by which he was standing.
"Knowest thou," he cried in an awful voice, "what thy wages are
for having let me out?" "No," replied the scholar fearlessly, "how
should I know that?" "Then I will tell thee," cried the spirit; "I
must strangle thee for it." "Thou shoiJdst have told me that
sooner," said the scholar, "for I should then have left thee shut up, but my head shall stand fast for all thou canst do; more persons
than one must be consulted about that." "More persons here, more
persons there," said the spirit. "Thou shalt have the wages thou hast earned. Dost thou think that I was shut up there for such a
long time as a favor? No, it was a punishment for me. I am the
mighty Mercurius. Whoso releases me, him must I strangle."
"Softly," answered the scholar, "not so fast. I must first know that thou wert shut up in that Httle bottle, and that thou art the right
spirit. If, indeed, thou canst get in again, I will befieve, and then
thou mayst do as thou wilt with me." The spirit said haughtily,
"That is a very tiifling feat," drew himself together, and made him- self as small and slender as he had been at first, so that he crept
through the same opening, and right through the neck of the bottle
in again. Scarcely was he within than the scholar thrust the cork he
622 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
had drawn back into the bottle, and threw it among the roots of the
oak into its old place, and the spirit was betrayed.
And now the scholar was about to return to his father, but the
spirit cried very piteously, "Ah, do let me out! ah, do let me outl"
"No," answered the scholar, "not a second timel He who has once tried to take my life shall not be set free by me, now that I have
caught him again." 'If thou wilt set me free," said the spirit, "I will give thee so much that thou wilt have plenty all the days of thy
life." "No," answered the scholar, "thou wouldst cheat me as thou
didst the first time." "Thou art playing away thy own good luck,"
said the spirit; "I will do thee no harm, but will reward thee
richly." The scholar thought, "I will venture it, perhaps he will
keep his word, and anyhow he shall not get the better of me." Then he took out the cork, and the spirit rose up from the bottle
as he had done before, stretched himself out and became as big as
a giant. "Now thou shalt have thy reward," said he, and handed the
scholar a httle bag just like a plaster, and said, "If thou spreadest one end of this over a wound it will heal, and if thou rubbest steel
or iron with the other end it will be changed into silver." '1 must
just try that," said the scholar, and went to a tree, tore off the bark with his axe, and rubbed it with one end of the plaster. It immediately closed together and was healed. "Now, it is all right," he said
to the spirit, "and we can part." The spirit thanked him for his release, and the scholar thanked the spirit for his present, and went back to his father.
"Where hast thou been racing about?" said the father; "why hast thou forgotten thy work? I said at once that thou wouldst never get
on with anything." "Be easy, father, I wiU make it up." "Make it up
indeed," said the father angrily, "there's no art in that." "Take care,
father, I will soon hew that tree there, so that it will split." Then he took his plaster, rubbed the axe with it, and dealt a mighty blow,
but as the iron had changed into silver, the edge turned. "Hollo, fa- ther, just look what a bad axe thou hast given me, it has become
quite crooked." The father was shocked and said, "Ah, what hast thou done? Now I shall have to pay for that, and have not the
wherewithal, and that is all the good I have got by thy work."
"Don't get angry," said the son, "I will soon pay for the axe." "Oh,
thou blockhead," cried the father, "wherewith wilt thou pay for it?
Thou hast nothing but what I give thee. These are students' tricks
that are sticking in thy head, but thou hast no idea of woodcutting,"
After a while the scholar said, "Father, I can really work no more,
we had better take a holiday." "Eh, whati" answered he. 'Dost
The Three Children of Fortune 623
thou think I will sit with my hands lying in my lap like thee? I must
go on working, but thou mayst take thyself home." "Father, I am
here in this wood for the first time, I don't know my way alone. Do
go with me." As his anger had now abated, the father at last let himself be persuaded and went home with him. Then he said to the son, "Go and sell thy damaged axe, and see what thou canst get for it, and I must
earn the difference, in order to pay the neighbor." The son took the axe, and carried it into town to a goldsmith, who tested it, laid it in
the scales, and said, 'It is worth four hundred thalers; I have not so
much as that by me." The son said, "Give me what you have, I will
lend you the rest." The goldsmith gave him three hundred thalers, and remained a hundred in his debt. The son thereupon went home
and said, "Father, I have got the money, go and ask the neighbor
what he wants for the axe." "I know that already," answered the
old man, "one thaler six groschen." "Then give him two thalers, twelve groschen, that is double and enough; see, I have money in
plenty," and he gave the father a hundred thalers, and said, "You
shall never know want; live as comfortably as you like." "Good
heavens!" said the father, "how hast thou come by these riches?" The scholar then told how all had come to pass, and how he,
trusting in his luck, had made such a good hit. But with the money
that was left, he went back to the High School and went on learning more, and as he could heal all wounds with his plaster, he be- came the most famous doctor in the whole world.
The Three Children of Fortune
Once upon a time a father sent for his three sons. He gave to the
eldest a cock, to the second a scythe, and to the third a cat.
"I am now old," said he, "my end is approaching, and I would hke to provide for you before I die. Money I have none, and what I
now give you seems of but little worth. Yet it rests with yourselves
to turn my gifts to good account. Go to a country where what you
have is as yet unknown, and your fortune is made." After the death of the father, the eldest set out with his cock. But
wherever he went, in every town he saw from afar off a cock sitting
upon the church steeple, and turning round with the wind. In the
624 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
villages he always heard plenty of them crowing, and his bird was
therefore nothing new; so there did not seem much chance of his
making his fortune. At length it happened that he came to an island
where the people who hved there had never heard of a cock, and
knew not even how to reckon the time. They knew, indeed, if it
were morning or evening; but at night, if they lay awake, they had
no means of knowing how time went.
"Behold," said he to them, "what a noble animal this isl How like a knight he isl He carries a bright red crest upon his head, and
spurs upon his heels; he crows three times every night, at stated
hours, and at the third time the sun is about to rise. But this is not
all. Sometimes he screams in broad daylight, and then you must
take warning, for the weather is surely about to change." This pleased the natives mightily. They kept awake one whole
night, and heard to their great joy how gloriously the cock called
the hour, at two, four, and six o'clock. Then they asked him whether the bird was to be sold, and how much he would sell it for.
"About as much gold as an ass can carry," said he. "A very fair
price for such an animal," they cried with one voice, and agreed to give him what he asked.
When he returned home with his wealth, his brothers wondered
greatly; and the second said, *T will now set forth likewise, and see
if I can turn my scythe to as good an account." There did not seem, however, much likelihood of this; for go where he would, he was
met by peasants who had as good a scythe on their shoulders as he
had. At last, as good luck would have it, he came to an island
where the people had never heard of a scythe. There, as soon as the
com was ripe, they went into the fields and pulled it up with their
hands, but this was very hard work, and a great deal of it was lost.
The man then set to work with his scythe, and mowed down their
whole crop so quickly that the people stood staring open-mouthed
with wonder. They were willing to give him what he asked for such
a marvelous thing; but he only took a horse laden with as much
gold as it could carry.
Now the third brother had a great longing to go and see what he
could make of his cat. So he set out. At first it happened to him as it
had to the others; so long as he kept upon the main land, he met
with no success. There were plenty of cats everywhere, indeed too
many, so that the young ones were for the most part, as soon as
they came into the world, drowned in the water. At last he passed
over to an island, where, as it chanced most luckily for him, nobody
The Three Children of Fortune 625
had ever seen a cat, and they were overrun with mice to such a degree, that the Uttle wretches danced upon the tables and chairs,
whether the master of the house were at home or not. The people
complained loudly of this grievance; the King himself knew not
how to rid himself of them in his palace. In every comer mice were
squeaking, and they gnawed everything that their teeth could lay
hold of. Here was a fine field for Puss. She soon began her chase,
and had cleared two rooms in the twinkling of an eye. Then the
people besought their King to buy the wonderful animal for the
good of the public, at any price. The King willingly gave what was
asked— a mule laden with gold and jewels. And thus the third
brother returned home with a richer prize than either of the others.
Meantime the cat feasted away upon the mice in the royal palace, and devoured so many that they were no longer in any great
numbers. At length, quite spent and tired with her work, she became extremely thirsty; so she stood stiU, drew up her head, and
cried, "Miau, Miaul' The King gathered together all his subjects when they heard this
strange cry, and many ran shrieking in a great fright out of the palace. But the King held a council below as to what was best to be
done; and it was at length fixed to send a herald to the cat, to warn
her to leave the castle forthwith, or that force would be used to
remove her. "For," said the counsellors, "we would far more will- ingly put up with the mice (since we are used to that evil), than
get rid of them at the risk of oiu: lives." A page accordingly went, and asked the cat, whether she were willing to quit the castle. But
Puss, whose thirst became every moment more and more pressing,
answered nothing but "Miaul Miaul" which the page interpreted to
mean "Nol Nol" and therefore carried this answer to the King.
"Well," said the counsellors, "then we must try what force will
do." So the guns were planted, and the palace was fired upon from all sides. When the fire reached the room where the cat was, she
sprang out of the window and ran away. But the besiegers did not
see her, and went on firing until the whole palace was burnt to the
ground.
The Cunning Little Tailor
Once upon a time there was a Princess who was extremely proud.
If a wooer came she gave him some riddle to guess, and if he could
not find it out, he was sent contemptuously away. She let it be
made known also that whosoever solved her riddle should marry
her, no matter who he might be.
At length three tailors fell in with each other. The two eldest
thought they had done so many dexterous bits of work successfully
that they could not fail to succeed in this also; the third did not
even know his trade, but thought he must have some luck in this
venture, for where else was it to come from? Then the two others
said to him, "Just stay at home; thou canst not do much with thy
Mttle bit of understanding." The little tailor, however, did not let himself be discouraged, and said he had set his head to work about
this for once, and he would manage well enough, and he went forth as if the whole world were his.
All three announced themselves to the Princess, and said she was
to propound her riddle to them, and that the right persons were
now come who had understandings so fine that they could be
threaded in a needle. Then said the Princess, "I have two kinds of
hair on my head, of what color is it?" "If that be all," said the first,
"it must be black and white, like the cloth which is called pepper
and salt.'" The Princess said, "Wrongly guessed; let the second answer." Then said the second, "If it be not black and white, then
it is brown and red, Hke my father's company coat." "Wrongly
guessed," said the Princess, 'let the third give the answer, for I see
very well he knows it for certain." Then the little tailor stepped
boldly forth and said, "The Princess has a silver and a golden hair
on her head, and those are the two different colors." When the Princess heard that, she turned pale and nearly fell
down with terror, for the little tailor had guessed her riddle, and
she had firmly believed that no man on earth could discover it.
When her coinrage returned she said, "Thou hast not won me yet by that; there is still something else that thou must do. Below, in
the stable, is a bear with which thou shalt pass the night, and when
I get up in the morning if thou art still alive, thou shalt marry me." She expected, however, she should thus get rid of the tailor, for the
The Cunning Little Tailor 627
bear had never yet left any one alive who had fallen into his
clutches. The little tailor did not let himself be frightened away,
but was quite delighted, and said, "Boldly ventured is half won." When, therefore, the evening came, our Httle tailor was taken down to the bear. The bear was about to set at the Httle fellow at
once, and give him a hearty welcome with his paws. "Softly,
softly," said the little tailor, "I will soon make thee quiet." Then quite composedly, and as if he had not an anxiety in the world, he
took some nuts out of his pocket, cracked them, and ate the kernels.
When the bear saw that, he was seized with a desire to have some
nuts too. The tailor felt in his pockets, and reached him a handful;
they were, however, not nuts, but pebbles. The bear put them in
his mouth, but could get nothing out of them, let him bite as he
would. "Ehl" thought he, "what a stupid blockhead I am! I cannot
even crack a nut!" and then he said to the tailor, "Here, crack me
the nuts." "There, see what a stupid fellow thou arti" said the httle
tailor, "to have such a great mouth, and not be able to crack a
small nuti" Then he took the pebble and nimbly put a nut in his
mouth in the place of it, and crack, it was in twol "I must try the
thing again," said the bear; "when I watch thee, I then think I
ought to be able to do it too." So the tailor once more gave him a pebble, and the bear tried and tried to bite into it with all the
stiength of his body. But no one will imagine that he accompHshed it.
When that was over, the tailor took out a viohn from beneath his
coat, and played a piece on it to himself. When the bear heard the
music, he could not help beginning to dance, and when he had
danced a while, the thing pleased him so well that he said to the
little tailor, "Hark you, is the fiddle heavy?" "Light enough for a child. Look, with the left hand I lay fingers on it, and with the right
I stroke it with the bow, and then it goes merrily, hop sa sa vivallalera!" "So," said the bear; "fiddling is a thing I should hke to un- derstand too, that I might d^noe whenever I had a fancy. What
dost thou think of that? Wilt thou give me lessons?" "With all my
heart," said the tailor, "if thou hast a talent for it. But just let me
see thy claws, they are terribly long, I must cut thy nails a little." Then a vise was brought, and the bear put his claws in it, and the
Httle tailor screwed it tieht, and said, "Now wait until I come with
the scissors," and he let the bear srowl as he liked, and lay down in the corner on a bundle of straw, and fell asleep.
When the Princess heard the bear growHng so fiercely during the
night, she beHeved nothing else but that he was growHng for joy.
628 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
and had made an end of the tailor. In the morning she arose careless and happy, but when she peeped into the stable, the tailor
stood gaily before her, and was as healthy as a fish in the water.
Now she could not say another word against the wedding because
she had given a promise before every one, and the King ordered a
carriage to be brought in which she was to drive to church with the
tailor, and there she was to be mairied. When they had got into the
carriage, the two other tailors, who had false hearts and envied him
his good fortune, went into the stable and unscrewed the bear
again. The bear in great fury ran after the carriage. The Princess
heard him snorting and growling; she was terrified, and she cried,
"Ah, the bear is behind us and wants to get theel" The tailor was quick and stood on his head, stuck his legs out of the window, and
cried, "Dost thou see the vise? If thou dost not be ofiF thou shalt be
put into it again." When the bear saw that, he turned round and ran away. The tailor drove quietly to church, and the Princess was
married to him at once, and he Hved with her as happy as a woodlark. . . . And whoever does not believe this, must pay a thaler.
The Riddle
A king's son once had a great desire to travel through the world, so he started o£F, taking no one with him but one trusty servant. One
day he came to a great forest, and as evening drew on and he could
find no shelter he could not think where to spend the night. All of a
sudden he saw a girl going toward a Httle house, and as he drew
near he saw that she was both young and pretty. He spoke to her,
and said, "Dear child, could I spend the night in this house?"
"Oh, yes," said the girl in a sad tone, "you can if you Hke, but I
should not advise you to do so. Better not go in."
"Why not?" asked the King's son.
The girl sighed, and answered, "My stepmother deals in black
magic, and she is not friendly to strangers."
The Prince guessed easily he had come to a wdtch's house, but it was now dark and he could go no farther. Moreover, he was not
afraid, and he stepped in with his groom.
An old woman sat in an armchair near the fire, and as they en-
The Riddle 629
tered, she turned her red eyes on them. "Good evening," she muttered, pretending to be friendly. "Won't you sit down?" She blew up the fire on which she was cooking something in a little pot. But her daughter had warned the travelers to be careful not
to eat or drink anything, as the old woman's brews were likely to be dangerous.
They went to bed and slept soundly till morning. When they
were ready to start, and the King's son had aheady mounted his
horse, the old woman said, "Wait a minute, I must give you a stirrup cup." While she went to fetch it the King's son rode off, and the groom who had waited to tighten his saddle girths was alone when the witch returned.
"Take that to your master," she said. But as she spoke the glass cracked and the poison spurted over the horse. It was so powerful
the poor creature sank down dead. The servant ran after his master
and told him what had happened, and then, not wishing to lose the
saddle as well as the horse, he went back to fetch it. When he
reached the spot he saw a raven had perched on the carcass and
was pecking at it.
"Who knows whether we shall get anything better to eat todayl" said the man, and he shot the raven and carried it off.
Then they rode on all day through the forest without coming to
the end. At nightfall they reached an inn. The servant made the
landlord a present of the raven. Now, as it happened, this irm was
the resort of a band of robbers, and the old witch, too, was in the
habit of frequenting it.
As soon as it was dark twelve thieves arrived, with the full intention of killing and robbing the strangers. However, they sat down
first to table, where the landlord and the old witch joined them,
and they all ate some broth in which the flesh of the raven had
been boiled. They had hardly taken a couple of spoonfuls when
they all fell down dead, for the poison had passed from the horse to
the raven and so into the broth. There was no one left belonging to
the house but the landlord's daughter, who was a good, well-mean- ing girl and had taken no part in all the evil doings.
She opened all the doors and showed the strangers the treasures
the robbers had gathered together. The Prince bade her keep them
all for herself, as he wanted none of them, and so he rode on with
his servant.
After traveling about for some time they reached a town where
lived a lovely but arrogant Princess. She had announced that any- one who asked her a riddle which she was unable to guess should
630 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
be her husband, but should she guess it he must forfeit his head.
She claimed thi-ee days in which to think over the riddles, but she was so clever she invariably guessed them in much shorter time.
Nine suitors had already lost their lives when the King's son ar- rived, and, dazzled by her beauty, determined to risk his Me. He
came before her and propounded his riddle.
"What is this?" he asked. "One slew none and yet killed twelve." She could not think what it was! She thought and thought and
looked through all her books of riddles and puzzles. She found
nothing to help her and could not guess. In fact, she was at her
wits' end. As she could think of no way to guess the riddle, she ordered her maid to steal at night into the Prince's bedroom and lis- ten. She thought he might talk aloud in his dreams and so betray
the secret. But the clever servant had taken his master's place, and when the maid came, he tore ofiF the cloak she had wrapped about herself and chased her oflF.
On the second night the Princess sent her lady-in-waiting, hoping she might succeed better. But the servant took away her mantle
and chased her away also.
On the third night the King's son thought he really might feel safe, so he went to bed. But in the middle of the night the Princess
came herself, wrapped in a misty gray mantle, and sat down near
him. When she thought he was fast asleep, she spoke to him, hoping he would answer in the midst of his dreams as many people do.
But he was wide awake all the time and heard and understood everything very well.
Then she asked, "One slew none— what is that?" And he answered, "A raven which fed on the carcass of a poisoned horse."
She went on, "And yet killed twelve— what is that?" "Those are twelve robbers who ate the raven and died of it." As soon as she knew the riddle she tried to slip away, but he held
her mantle so tightly she was obliged to leave it behind.
Next morning the Princess announced she had guessed the riddle
and sent for the twelve judges, before whom she declared it. But
the young man begged to be heard. Then he said, "She came by
night to question me; otherwise she never could have guessed it."
The judges said, "Bring us some proof." So the servant brought out the three cloaks. When the judges saw the gray one, which the
Princess was in the habit of wearing, they said, "Let it be embroidered wdth gold and silver. It shall be your wedding mantle."
A Riddling Tale
Three women were changed into flowers which grew m the field,
but one of them was allowed to be in her own home at night. Then
once when day was drawing near, and she was forced to go back to
her companions in the field and become a flower again, she said to
her husband, "If you will come this afternoon and gather me, I
shall be set free and henceforth stay with you." And he did so. Now the question is, how did her husband know her, for the
flowers were exactly alike, and without any difference?
Answer: Since she was at her home during the night and not in
the field, no dew fell on her as it did on the others, and by this her husband knew her.
The Beam
There was once a magician who was standing in the midst of a
great crowd of people performing his wonders. He had a cock
brought in, which lifted a heavy beam and carried it as if it were as
light as a feather. But a girl was present who had just found a bit of
four-leaved clover, and had thus become so vdse that no deception
could stand out against her, and she saw that the beam was nothing
but a straw. So she cried, "You people, do you not see that it is a
straw that the cock is carrying, and no beam?" Immediately the en- chantment vanished, and the people saw what it was, and drove the
magician away in shame and disgrace. He, however, full of inward
anger, said, "1 will soon revenge myself."
After some time the girl's wedding-day came, and she was decked out, and went in a great procession over the fields to the
place where the church was. All at once she came to a stream
which was very much swollen, and there was no bridge and no
plank to cross it. Then the bride nimbly took her clothes up, and
wanted to wade through it. And just as she was thus standing in the
water a man— and it was the enchanter— cried mockingly close be-
632 Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales
side her, "Aha! Where are thine eyes that thou takest that for
water?" Then her eyes were opened, and she saw that she was standing with her clothes lifted up in the middle of a field that was
blue with flowers of blue flax. Then all the people saw it likewise,
and chased her away with ridicule and laughter.







